P
ROLOGUE
Eliminating All the Traces
1.
T
his morning Rino telephoned. I thought he wanted money again and I was
ready to say no. But that was not the reason for the phone call: his mother was
gone.
“Since when?”
“Since two weeks ago.”
“And you’re calling me now?”
My tone must have seemed hostile, even though I wasn’t angry or offended;
there was just a touch of sarcasm. He tried to respond but he did so in an
awkward, muddled way, half in dialect, half in Italian. He said he was sure that
his mother was wandering around Naples as usual.
“Even at night?”
“You know how she is.”
“I do, but does two weeks of absence seem normal?”
“Yes. You haven’t seen her for a while, Elena, she’s gotten worse: she’s never
sleepy, she comes in, goes out, does what she likes.”
Anyway, in the end he had started to get worried. He had asked everyone,
made the rounds of the hospitals: he had even gone to the police. Nothing, his
mother wasn’t anywhere. What a good son: a large man, forty years old, who
hadn’t  worked  in  his  life,  just  a  small-time  crook  and  spendthrift.  I  could
imagine how carefully he had done his searching. Not at all. He had no brain,
and in his heart he had only himself.
“She’s not with you?” he asked suddenly.
His mother? Here in Turin? He knew the situation perfectly well, he was
speaking only to speak. Yes, he liked to travel, he had come to my house at
least a dozen times, without being invited. His mother, whom I would have
welcomed with pleasure, had never left Naples in her life. I answered: “No,
she’s not with me.”
“You’re sure?”
“Rino, please, I told you she’s not here.”
“Then where has she gone?”
He began to cry and I let him act out his desperation, sobs that began fake
and  became  real.  When  he  stopped  I  said:  “Please,  for  once  behave  as  she
would like: don’t look for her.”
“What do you mean?”
“Just what I said. It’s pointless. Learn to stand on your own two feet and
don’t call me again, either.”
I hung up.
2.
Rino’s mother is named Raffaella Cerullo, but everyone has always called her
Lina. Not me, I’ve never used either her first name or her last. To me, for more
than sixty years, she’s been Lila. If I were to call her Lina or Raffaella, suddenly,
like that, she would think our friendship was over.
It’s  been  at  least  three  decades  since  she  told  me  that  she  wanted  to
disappear without leaving a trace, and I’m the only one who knows what she
means. She never had in mind any sort of flight, a change of identity, the
dream of making a new life somewhere else. And she never thought of suicide,
repulsed by the idea that Rino would have anything to do with her body, and
be forced to attend to the details. She meant something different: she wanted
to vanish; she wanted every one of her cells to disappear, nothing of her ever
to be found. And since I know her well, or at least I think I know her, I take it
for granted that she has found a way to disappear, to leave not so much as a
hair anywhere in this world.
3.
Days passed. I looked at my e-mail, at my regular mail, but not with any
hope. I often wrote to her, and she almost never responded: this was her habit.
She preferred the telephone or long nights of talk when I went to Naples.
I opened my drawers, the metal boxes where I keep all kinds of things. Not
much there. I’ve thrown away a lot of stuff, especially anything that had to do
with her, and she knows it. I discovered that I have nothing of hers, not a
picture, not a note, not a little gift. I was surprised myself. Is it possible that in
all those years she left me nothing of herself, or, worse, that I didn’t want to
keep anything of her? It is.
This time I telephoned Rino; I did it unwillingly. He didn’t answer on the
house phone or on his cell phone. He called me in the evening, when it was
convenient. He spoke in the tone of voice he uses to arouse pity.
“I saw that you called. Do you have any news?”
“No. Do you?”
“Nothing.”
He rambled incoherently. He wanted to go on TV, on the show that looks for
missing persons, make an appeal, ask his mamma’s forgiveness for everything,
beg her to return.
I listened patiently, then asked him: “Did you look in her closet?”
“What for?”
Naturally the most obvious thing would never occur to him.
“Go and look.”
He  went,  and  he  realized  that  there  was  nothing  there,  not  one  of  his
mother’s dresses, summer or winter, only old hangers. I sent him to search the
whole house. Her shoes were gone. The few books: gone. All the photographs:
gone. The movies: gone. Her computer had disappeared, including the old-
fashioned diskettes and everything, everything to do with her experience as an
electronics wizard who had begun to operate computers in the late sixties, in
the days of punch cards. Rino was astonished. I said to him: “Take as much
time  as  you  want,  but  then  call  and  tell  me  if  you’ve  found  even  a  single
hairpin that belongs to her.”
He called the next day, greatly agitated.
“There’s nothing.”
“Nothing at all?”
“No. She cut herself out of all the photographs of the two of us, even those
from when I was little.”
“You looked carefully?”
“Everywhere.”
“Even in the cellar?”
“I told you, everywhere. And the box with her papers is gone: I don’t know,
old  birth  certificates,  telephone  bills,  receipts.  What  does  it  mean?  Did
someone steal everything? What are they looking for? What do they want from
my mother and me?”
I reassured him, I told him to calm down. It was unlikely that anyone wanted
anything, especially from him.
“Can I come and stay with you for a while?”
“No.”
“Please, I can’t sleep.”
“That’s your problem, Rino, I don’t know what to do about it.”
I hung up and when he called back I didn’t answer. I sat down at my desk.
Lila is overdoing it as usual, I thought.
She was expanding the concept of trace out of all proportion. She wanted
not only to disappear herself, now, at the age of sixty-six, but also to eliminate
the entire life that she had left behind.
I was really angry.
We’ll see who wins this time, I said to myself. I turned on the computer and
began to write—all the details of our story, everything that still remained in
my memory.
C
HILDHOOD
The Story of Don Achille
1.
My friendship with Lila began the day we decided to go up the dark stairs
that  led,  step  after  step,  flight  after  flight,  to  the  door  of  Don  Achille’s
apartment.
I remember the violet light of the courtyard, the smells of a warm spring
evening. The mothers were making dinner, it was time to go home, but we
delayed,  challenging  each  other,  without  ever  saying  a  word,  testing  our
courage. For some time, in school and outside of it, that was what we had been
doing.  Lila  would  thrust  her  hand  and  then  her  whole  arm  into  the  black
mouth  of  a  manhole,  and  I,  in  turn,  immediately  did  the  same,  my  heart
pounding, hoping that the cockroaches wouldn’t run over my skin, that the
rats wouldn’t bite me. Lila climbed up to Signora Spagnuolo’s ground-floor
window, and, hanging from the iron bar that the clothesline was attached to,
swung  back  and  forth,  then  lowered  herself  down  to  the  sidewalk,  and  I
immediately did the same, although I was afraid of falling and hurting myself.
Lila stuck into her skin the rusted safety pin that she had found on the street
somewhere but kept in her pocket like the gift of a fairy godmother; I watched
the metal point as it dug a whitish tunnel into her palm, and then, when she
pulled it out and handed it to me, I did the same.
At some point she gave me one of her firm looks, eyes narrowed, and headed
toward  the  building  where  Don  Achille  lived.  I  was  frozen  with  fear.  Don
Achille was the ogre of fairy tales, I was absolutely forbidden to go near him,
speak to him, look at him, spy on him, I was to act as if neither he nor his
family existed. Regarding him there was, in my house but not only mine, a fear
and a hatred whose origin I didn’t know. The way my father talked about him, I
imagined a huge man, covered with purple boils, violent in spite of the “don,”
which to me suggested a calm authority. He was a being created out of some
unidentifiable  material,  iron,  glass,  nettles,  but  alive,  alive,  the  hot  breath
streaming from his nose and mouth. I thought that if I merely saw him from a
distance he would drive something sharp and burning into my eyes. So if I was
mad enough to approach the door of his house he would kill me.
I waited to see if Lila would have second thoughts and turn back. I knew
what she wanted to do, I had hoped that she would forget about it, but in vain.
The street lamps were not yet lighted, nor were the lights on the stairs. From
the apartments came irritable voices. To follow Lila I had to leave the bluish
light of the courtyard and enter the black of the doorway. When I finally made
up my mind, I saw nothing at first, there was only an odor of old junk and DDT.
Then I got used to the darkness and found Lila sitting on the first step of the
first flight of stairs. She got up and we began to climb.
We kept to the side where the wall was, she two steps ahead, I two steps
behind, torn between shortening the distance or letting it increase. I can still
feel my shoulder inching along the flaking wall and the idea that the steps
were  very  high,  higher  than  those  in  the  building  where  I  lived.  I  was
trembling. Every footfall, every voice was Don Achille creeping up behind us or
coming down toward us with a long knife, the kind used for slicing open a
chicken breast. There was an odor of sautéing garlic. Maria, Don Achille’s wife,
would put me in the pan of boiling oil, the children would eat me, he would
suck my head the way my father did with mullets.
We stopped often, and each time I hoped that Lila would decide to turn back.
I was all sweaty, I don’t know about her. Every so often she looked up, but I
couldn’t tell at what, all that was visible was the gray areas of the big windows
at  every  landing.  Suddenly  the  lights  came  on,  but  they  were  faint,  dusty,
leaving broad zones of shadow, full of dangers. We waited to see if it was Don
Achille who had turned the switch, but we heard nothing, neither footsteps
nor the opening or closing of a door. Then Lila continued on, and I followed.
She  thought  that  what  we  were  doing  was  just  and  necessary;  I  had
forgotten every good reason, and certainly was there only because she was. We
climbed slowly toward the greatest of our terrors of that time, we went to
expose ourselves to fear and interrogate it.
At the fourth flight Lila did something unexpected. She stopped to wait for
me,  and  when  I  reached  her  she  gave  me  her  hand.  This  gesture  changed
everything between us forever.
2.
It was her fault. Not too long before—ten days, a month, who can say, we
knew nothing about time, in those days—she had treacherously taken my doll
and thrown her down into a cellar. Now we were climbing toward fear; then we
had felt obliged to descend, quickly, into the unknown. Up or down, it seemed
to us that we were always going toward something terrible that had existed
before us yet had always been waiting for us, just for us. When you haven’t
been in the world long, it’s hard to comprehend what disasters are at the
origin of a sense of disaster: maybe you don’t even feel the need to. Adults,
waiting for tomorrow, move in a present behind which is yesterday or the day
before yesterday or at most last week: they don’t want to think about the rest.
Children don’t know the meaning of yesterday, of the day before yesterday, or
even of tomorrow, everything is this, now: the street is this, the doorway is
this, the stairs are this, this is Mamma, this is Papa, this is the day, this the
night. I was small and really my doll knew more than I did. I talked to her, she
talked to me. She had a plastic face and plastic hair and plastic eyes. She wore a
blue dress that my mother had made for her in a rare moment of happiness,
and she was beautiful. Lila’s doll, on the other hand, had a cloth body of a
yellowish color, filled with sawdust, and she seemed to me ugly and grimy. The
two spied on each other, they sized each other up, they were ready to flee into
our arms if a storm burst, if there was thunder, if someone bigger and stronger,
with sharp teeth, wanted to snatch them away.
We played in the courtyard but as if we weren’t playing together. Lila sat on
the ground, on one side of a small barred basement window, I on the other. We
liked that place, especially because behind the bars was a metal grating and,
against the grating, on the cement ledge between the bars, we could arrange
the things that belonged to Tina, my doll, and those of Nu, Lila’s doll. There we
put rocks, bottle tops, little flowers, nails, splinters of glass. I overheard what
Lila said to Nu and repeated it in a low voice to Tina, slightly modified. If she
took a bottle top and put it on her doll’s head, like a hat, I said to mine, in
dialect, Tina, put on your queen’s crown or you’ll catch cold. If Nu played
hopscotch in Lila’s arms, I soon afterward made Tina do the same. Still, it never
happened that we decided on a game and began playing together. Even that
place we chose without explicit agreement. Lila sat down there, and I strolled
around, pretending to go somewhere else. Then, as if I’d given it no thought, I,
too, settled next to the cellar window, but on the opposite side.
The thing that attracted us most was the cold air that came from the cellar, a
breath that refreshed us in spring and summer. And then we liked the bars
with their spiderwebs, the darkness, and the tight mesh of the grating that,
reddish with rust, curled up both on my side and on Lila’s, creating two parallel
holes through which we could drop rocks into obscurity and hear the sound
when they hit bottom. It was all beautiful and frightening then. Through those
openings the darkness might suddenly seize the dolls, who sometimes were
safe in our arms, but more often were placed deliberately next to the twisted
grating and thus exposed to the cellar’s cold breath, to its threatening noises,
rustling, squeaking, scraping.
Nu  and  Tina  weren’t  happy.  The  terrors  that  we  tasted  every  day  were
theirs.  We  didn’t  trust  the  light  on  the  stones,  on  the  buildings,  on  the
scrubland beyond the neighborhood, on the people inside and outside their
houses. We imagined the dark corners, the feelings repressed but always close
to exploding. And to those shadowy mouths, the caverns that opened beyond
them under the buildings, we attributed everything that frightened us in the
light of day. Don Achille, for example, was not only in his apartment on the top
floor but also down below, a spider among spiders, a rat among rats, a shape
that assumed all shapes. I imagined him with his mouth open because of his
long  animal  fangs,  his  body  of  glazed  stone  and  poisonous  grasses,  always
ready to pick up in an enormous black bag anything we dropped through the
torn corners of the grate. That bag was a fundamental feature of Don Achille,
he always had it, even at home, and into it he put material both living and
dead.
Lila knew that I had that fear, my doll talked about it out loud. And so, on the
day we exchanged our dolls for the first time—with no discussion, only looks
and gestures—as soon as she had Tina, she pushed her through the grate and
let her fall into the darkness.
3.
Lila  appeared  in  my  life  in  first  grade  and  immediately  impressed  me
because she was very bad. In that class we were all a little bad, but only when
the teacher, Maestra Oliviero, couldn’t see us. Lila, on the other hand, was
always bad. Once she tore up some blotting paper into little pieces, dipped the
pieces one by one in the inkwell, and then fished them out with her pen and
threw them at us. I was hit twice in the hair and once on my white collar. The
teacher  yelled,  as  she  knew  how  to  do,  in  a  voice  like  a  needle,  long  and
pointed,  which  terrorized  us,  and  ordered  her  to  go  and  stand  behind  the
blackboard in punishment. Lila didn’t obey and didn’t even seem frightened;
she just kept throwing around pieces of inky paper. So Maestra Oliviero, a
heavy woman who seemed very old to us, though she couldn’t have been much
over forty, came down from the desk, threatening her. The teacher stumbled,
it wasn’t clear on what, lost her balance, and fell, striking her face against the
corner of a desk. She lay on the floor as if dead.
What happened right afterward I don’t remember, I remember only the dark
bundle of the teacher’s motionless body, and Lila staring at her with a serious
expression.
I have in my mind so many incidents of this type. We lived in a world in
which  children  and  adults  were  often  wounded,  blood  flowed  from  the
wounds, they festered, and sometimes people died. One of the daughters of
Signora Assunta, the fruit and vegetable seller, had stepped on a nail and died
of tetanus. Signora Spagnuolo’s youngest child had died of croup. A cousin of
mine, at the age of twenty, had gone one morning to move some rubble and
that night was dead, crushed, the blood pouring out of his ears and mouth. My
mother’s father had been killed when he fell from a scaffolding at a building
site. The father of Signor Peluso was missing an arm, the lathe had caught him
unawares.  The  sister  of  Giuseppina,  Signor  Peluso’s  wife,  had  died  of
tuberculosis at twenty-two. The oldest son of Don Achille—I had never seen
him, and yet I seemed to remember him—had gone to war and died twice:
drowned in the Pacific Ocean, then eaten by sharks. The entire Melchiorre
family had died clinging to each other, screaming with fear, in a bombardment.
Old Signorina Clorinda had died inhaling gas instead of air. Giannino, who was
in fourth grade when we were in first, had died one day because he had come
across  a  bomb  and  touched  it.  Luigina,  with  whom  we  had  played  in  the
courtyard, or maybe not, she was only a name, had died of typhus. Our world
was like that, full of words that killed: croup, tetanus, typhus, gas, war, lathe,
rubble, work, bombardment, bomb, tuberculosis, infection. With these words
and those years I bring back the many fears that accompanied me all my life.
You could also die of things that seemed normal. You could die, for example,
if you were sweating and then drank cold water from the tap without first
bathing your wrists: you’d break out in red spots, you’d start coughing, and be
unable to breathe. You could die if you ate black cherries and didn’t spit out
the  pits.  You  could  die  if  you  chewed  American  gum  and  inadvertently
swallowed  it.  You  could  die  if  you  banged  your  temple.  The  temple,  in
particular, was a fragile place, we were all careful about it. Being hit with a
stone could do it, and throwing stones was the norm. When we left school a
gang of boys from the countryside, led by a kid called Enzo or Enzuccio, who
was one of the children of Assunta the fruit and vegetable seller, began to
throw rocks at us. They were angry because we were smarter than them. When
the rocks came at us we ran away, except Lila, who kept walking at her regular
pace  and  sometimes  even  stopped.  She  was  very  good  at  studying  the
trajectory of the stones and dodging them with an easy move that today I
would call elegant. She had an older brother and maybe she had learned from
him, I don’t know, I also had brothers, but they were younger than me and
from them I had learned nothing. Still, when I realized that she had stayed
behind, I stopped to wait for her, even though I was scared.
Already then there was something that kept me from abandoning her. I
didn’t know her well; we had never spoken to each other, although we were
constantly competing, in class and outside it. But in a confused way I felt that if
I ran away with the others I would leave with her something of mine that she
would never give back.
At first I stayed hidden, around a corner, and leaned out to see if Lila was
coming. Then, since she wouldn’t budge, I forced myself to rejoin her; I handed
her stones, and even threw some myself. But I did it without conviction: I did
many things in my life without conviction; I always felt slightly detached from
my own actions. Lila, on the other hand, had, from a young age—I can’t say
now precisely if it was so at six or seven, or when we went together up the
stairs that led to Don Achille’s and were eight, almost nine—the characteristic
of absolute determination. Whether she was gripping the tricolor shaft of the
pen or a stone or the handrail on the dark stairs, she communicated the idea
that whatever came next—thrust the pen with a precise motion into the wood
of the desk, dispense inky bullets, strike the boys from the countryside, climb
the stairs to Don Achille’s door—she would do without hesitation.
The gang came from the railroad embankment, stocking up on rocks from
the trackbed. Enzo, the leader, was a dangerous child, with very short blond
hair and pale eyes; he was at least three years older than us, and had repeated
a year. He threw small, sharp-edged rocks with great accuracy, and Lila waited
for his throws to demonstrate how she evaded them, making him still angrier,
and responded with throws that were just as dangerous. Once we hit him in the
right calf, and I say we because I had handed Lila a flat stone with jagged edges.
The  stone  slid  over  Enzo’s  skin  like  a  razor,  leaving  a  red  stain  that
immediately gushed blood. The child looked at his wounded leg. I have him
before my eyes: between thumb and index finger he held the rock that he was
about to throw, his arm was raised to throw it, and yet he stopped, bewildered.
The  boys  under  his  command  also  looked  incredulously  at  the  blood.  Lila,
however, manifested not the least satisfaction in the outcome of the throw and
bent over to pick up another stone. I grabbed her by the arm; it was the first
contact between us, an abrupt, frightened contact. I felt that the gang would
get more ferocious and I wanted to retreat. But there wasn’t time. Enzo, in
spite of his bleeding calf, came out of his stupor and threw the rock in his
hand. I was still holding on to Lila when the rock hit her in the head and
knocked her away from me. A second later she was lying on the sidewalk with
a gash in her forehead.
4.
Blood.  In  general  it  came  from  wounds  only  after  horrible  curses  and
disgusting obscenities had been exchanged. That was the standard procedure.
My father, though he seemed to me a good man, hurled continuous insults and
threats if someone didn’t deserve, as he said, to be on the face of the earth. He
especially had it in for Don Achille. He always had something to accuse him of,
and sometimes I put my hands over my ears in order not to be too disturbed by
his brutal words. When he spoke of him to my mother he called him “your
cousin”  but  my  mother  denied  that  blood  tie  (there  was  a  very  distant
relationship)  and  added  to  the  insults.  Their  anger  frightened  me,  I  was
frightened  above  all  by  the  thought  that  Don  Achille  might  have  ears  so
sensitive that he could hear insults even from far away. I was afraid that he
might come and murder them.
The sworn enemy of Don Achille, however, was not my father but Signor
Peluso, a very good carpenter who was always broke, because he gambled away
everything he earned in the back room of the Bar Solara. Peluso was the father
of  our  classmate  Carmela,  of  Pasquale,  who  was  older,  and  of  two  others,
children poorer than us, with whom Lila and I sometimes played, and who in
school  and  outside  always  tried  to  steal  our  things,  a  pen,  an  eraser,  the
cotognata, so that they went home covered with bruises because we’d hit them.
The times we saw him, Signor Peluso seemed to us the image of despair. On
the one hand he lost everything gambling and on the other he was criticized in
public because he was no longer able to feed his family. For obscure reasons he
attributed  his  ruin  to  Don  Achille.  He  charged  him  with  having  taken  by
stealth, as if his shadowy body were a magnet, all the tools for his carpentry
work, which made the shop useless. He accused him of having taken the shop
itself, and transforming it into a grocery store. For years I imagined the pliers,
the saw, the tongs, the hammer, the vise, and thousands and thousands of nails
sucked up like a swarm of metal into the matter that made up Don Achille. For
years  I  saw  his  body—a  coarse  body,  heavy  with  a  mixture  of  materials—
emitting in a swarm salami, provolone, mortadella, lard, and prosciutto.
These things had happened in the dark ages. Don Achille had supposedly
revealed himself in all his monstrous nature before we were born. Before. Lila
often used that formulation. But she didn’t seem to care as much about what
had happened before us—events that were in general obscure, and about which
the adults either were silent or spoke with great reticence—as about the fact
that there really had been a before. It was this which at the time left her
puzzled and occasionally even made her nervous. When we became friends she
spoke so much of that absurd thing—before us—that she ended up passing on
her nervousness to me. It was the long, very long, period when we didn’t exist,
that period when Don Achille had showed himself to everyone for what he was:
an  evil  being  of  uncertain  animal-mineral  physiognomy,  who—it  seemed—
sucked blood from others while never losing any himself, maybe it wasn’t even
possible to scratch him.
We were in second grade, perhaps, and still hadn’t spoken to each other,
when the rumor spread that right in front of the Church of the Holy Family,
right after Mass, Signor Peluso had started screaming furiously at Don Achille.
Don Achille had left his older son Stefano, his daughter Pinuccia, Alfonso, who
was our age, and his wife, and, appearing for a moment in his most hair-raising
form, had hurled himself at Peluso, picked him up, thrown him against a tree
in the public gardens, and left him there, barely conscious, with blood coming
out of innumerable wounds in his head and everywhere, and the poor man able
to say merely: help.
5.
I feel no nostalgia for our childhood: it was full of violence. Every sort of
thing happened, at home and outside, every day, but I don’t recall having ever
thought that the life we had there was particularly bad. Life was like that,
that’s all, we grew up with the duty to make it difficult for others before they
made it difficult for us. Of course, I would have liked the nice manners that the
teacher and the priest preached, but I felt that those ways were not suited to
our  neighborhood,  even  if  you  were  a  girl.  The  women  fought  among
themselves more than the men, they pulled each other’s hair, they hurt each
other. To cause pain was a disease. As a child I imagined tiny, almost invisible
animals that arrived in the neighborhood at night, they came from the ponds,
from the abandoned train cars beyond the embankment, from the stinking
grasses called fetienti, from the frogs, the salamanders, the flies, the rocks, the
dust, and entered the water and the food and the air, making our mothers, our
grandmothers as angry as starving dogs. They were more severely infected
than the men, because while men were always getting furious, they calmed
down in the end; women, who appeared to be silent, acquiescent, when they
were angry flew into a rage that had no end.
Lila  was  deeply  affected  by  what  had  happened  to  Melina  Cappuccio,  a
relative of her mother’s. And I, too. Melina lived in the same building as my
family, we on the second floor, she on the third. She was only a little over
thirty and had six children, but to us she seemed an old woman. Her husband
was the same age; he unloaded crates at the fruit and vegetable market. I recall
him as short and broad, but handsome, with a proud face. One night he came
out of the house as usual and died, perhaps murdered, perhaps of weariness.
The  funeral  was  very  bitter;  the  whole  neighborhood  went,  including  my
parents,  and  Lila’s  parents.  Then  time  passed  and  something  happened  to
Melina. On the outside she remained the same, a gaunt woman with a large
nose, her hair already gray, a shrill voice that at night called her children from
the window, by name, the syllables drawn out by an angry despair: Aaa-daaa,
Miii-chè. At first she was much helped by Donato Sarratore, who lived in the
apartment right above hers, on the fourth and top floor. Donato was diligent in
his attendance at the Church of the Holy Family and as a good Christian he did
a lot for her, collecting money, used clothes, and shoes, settling Antonio, the
oldest son, in the auto-repair shop of Gorresio, an acquaintance of his. Melina
was so grateful that her gratitude became, in her desolate woman’s heart, love,
passion. It wasn’t clear if Sarratore was ever aware of it. He was a friendly man
but very serious—home, church, and job. He worked on a train crew for the
state railroad, and had a decent salary on which he supported his wife, Lidia,
and five children; the oldest was called Nino. When he wasn’t traveling on the
Naples-Paola route he devoted himself to fixing this or that in the house, he
did the shopping, took the youngest child out in the carriage. These things
were very unusual in the neighborhood. It occurred to no one that Donato was
generous  in  that  way  to  lighten  the  burdens  of  his  wife.  No:  all  the
neighborhood men, my father in the lead, considered him a womanish man,
even more so because he wrote poems and read them willingly to anyone. It
didn’t occur even to Melina. The widow preferred to think that, because of his
gentle spirit, he was put upon by his wife, and so she decided to do battle
against Lidia Sarratore to free him and let him join her permanently. The war
that  followed  at  first  seemed  funny;  it  was  discussed  in  my  house  and
elsewhere with malicious laughter. Lidia would hang out the sheets fresh from
the laundry and Melina climbed up on the windowsill and dirtied them with a
reed whose tip she had charred in the fire; Lidia passed under her windows and
she spit on her head or emptied buckets of dirty water on her; Lidia made noise
during the day walking above her, with her unruly children, and she banged
the floor mop against the ceiling all night. Sarratore tried by every means to
make  peace,  but  he  was  too  sensitive,  too  polite.  As  their  vindictiveness
increased, the two women began to insult each other if they met on the street
or the stairs: harsh, fierce sounds. It was then that they began to frighten me.
One of the many terrible scenes of my childhood begins with the shouts of
Melina and Lidia, with the insults they hurl from the windows and then on the
stairs;  it  continues  with  my  mother  rushing  to  our  door,  opening  it,  and
looking out, followed by us children; and ends with the image, for me still
unbearable,  of  the  two  neighbors  rolling  down  the  stairs,  entwined,  and
Melina’s head hitting the floor of the landing, a few inches from my shoes, like
a white melon that has slipped from your hand.
It’s hard to say why at the time we children took the part of Lidia Sarratore.
Maybe because she had regular features and blond hair. Or because Donato was
hers and we had understood that Melina wanted to take him away from her. Or
because Melina’s children were ragged and dirty, while Lidia’s were washed,
well groomed, and the oldest, Nino, who was a few years older than us, was
handsome,  and  we  liked  him.  Lila  alone  favored  Melina,  but  she  never
explained why. She said only, once, that if Lidia Sarratore ended up murdered
she deserved it, and I thought that it was partly because she was mean in her
heart and partly because she and Melina were distant relatives.
One day we were coming home from school, four or five girls. With us was
Marisa Sarratore, who usually joined us not because we liked her but because
we hoped that, through her, we might meet her older brother, that is to say
Nino. It was she who first noticed Melina. The woman was walking slowly from
one side of the stradone, the wide avenue that ran through the neighborhood,
to the other, carrying a paper bag in one hand from which, with the other, she
was taking something and eating it. Marisa pointed to her, calling her “the
whore,” without rancor, but because she was repeating the phrase that her
mother  used  at  home.  Lila,  although  she  was  shorter  and  very  thin,
immediately slapped her so hard that she knocked her down: ruthless, as she
usually was on occasions of violence, no yelling before or after, no word of
warning, cold and determined, not even widening her eyes.
First I went to the aid of Marisa, who was crying, and helped her get up, then
I turned to see what Lila was doing. She had left the sidewalk and was going
toward Melina, crossing the street without paying attention to the passing
trucks. I saw in her, in her posture more than in her face, something that
disturbed me and is still hard to define, so for now I’ll put it like this: she was
moving, cutting across the street, a small, dark, nervous figure, she was acting
with her usual determination, she was firm. Firm in what her mother’s relative
was doing, firm in the pain, firm in silence as a statue is firm. A follower. One
with Melina, who was holding in her palm the dark soft soap she had just
bought in Don Carlo’s cellar, and with her other hand was taking some and
eating it.
6.
The day Maestra Oliviero fell from the desk and hit her cheekbone against it,
I, as I said, thought she was dead, dead on the job like my grandfather or
Melina’s husband, and it seemed to me that as a result Lila, too, would die
because of the terrible punishment she would get. Instead, for a period I can’t
define—short,  long—nothing  happened.  They  simply  disappeared,  both  of
them, teacher and pupil, from our days and from memory.
But  then  everything  was  surprising.  Maestra  Oliviero  returned  to  school
alive and began to concern herself with Lila, not to punish her, as would have
seemed to us natural, but to praise her.
This new phase began when Lila’s mother, Signora Cerullo, was called to
school. One morning the janitor knocked and announced her. Right afterward
Nunzia Cerullo came in, unrecognizable. She, who, like the majority of the
neighborhood  women,  lived  untidily  in  slippers  and  shabby  old  dresses,
appeared  in  her  formal  black  dress  (wedding,  communion,  christening,
funeral),  with  a  shiny  black  purse  and  low-heeled  shoes  that  tortured  her
swollen feet, and handed the teacher two paper bags, one containing sugar and
the other coffee.
The teacher accepted the gifts with pleasure and, looking at Lila, who was
staring at the desk, spoke to her, and to the whole class, words whose general
sense disoriented me. We were just learning the alphabet and the numbers
from one to ten. I was the smartest in the class, I could recognize all the letters,
I knew how to say one two three four and so on, I was constantly praised for
my  handwriting,  I  won  the  tricolor  cockades  that  the  teacher  sewed.  Yet,
surprisingly, Maestra Oliviero, although Lila had made her fall and sent her to
the hospital, said that she was the best among us. True that she was the worst-
behaved. True that she had done that terrible thing of shooting ink-soaked bits
of blotting paper at us. True that if that girl had not acted in such a disruptive
manner she, our teacher, would not have fallen and cut her cheek. True that
she was compelled to punish her constantly with the wooden rod or by sending
her to kneel on the hard floor behind the blackboard. But there was a fact that,
as a teacher and also as a person, filled her with joy, a marvelous fact that she
had discovered a few days earlier, by chance.
Here she stopped, as if words were not enough, or as if she wished to teach
Lila’s mother and us that deeds almost always count more than words. She
took a piece of chalk and wrote on the blackboard (now I don’t remember
what, I didn’t yet know how to read: so I’m inventing the word) “sun.” Then
she asked Lila:
“Cerullo, what is written there?”
In the classroom a fascinated silence fell. Lila half smiled, almost a grimace,
and flung herself sideways, against her deskmate, who was visibly irritated.
Then she read in a sullen tone:
“Sun.”
Nunzia  Cerullo  looked  at  the  teacher,  and  her  look  was  hesitant,  almost
fearful. The teacher at first seemed not to understand why her own enthusiasm
was not reflected in the mother’s eyes. But then she must have guessed that
Nunzia didn’t know how to read, or, anyway, that she wasn’t sure the word
“sun” really was written on the blackboard, and she frowned. Then, partly to
clarify the situation to Signora Cerullo, partly to praise our classmate, she said
to Lila:
“Good, ‘sun’ is what it says there.”
Then she ordered her:
“Come, Cerullo, come to the blackboard.”
Lila went unwillingly to the blackboard, the teacher handed her the chalk.
“Write,” she said to her, “ ‘chalk.’ ”
Lila, very concentrated, in shaky handwriting, placing the letters one a little
higher, one a little lower, wrote: “chak.”
Oliviero added the “l” and Signora Cerullo, seeing the correction, said in
despair to her daughter:
“You made a mistake.”
But the teacher immediately reassured her:
“No, no, no. Lila has to practice, yes, but she already knows how to read, she
already knows how to write. Who taught her?”
Signora Cerullo, eyes lowered, said: “Not me.”
“But at your house or in the building is there someone who might have
taught her?”
Nunzia shook her head no emphatically.
Then the teacher turned to Lila and with sincere admiration asked her in
front of all of us, “Who taught you to read and write, Cerullo?”
Cerullo, that small dark-haired, dark-eyed child, in a dark smock with a red
ribbon at the neck, and only six years old, answered, “Me.”
7.
According to Rino, Lila’s older brother, she had learned to read at the age of
around three by looking at the letters and pictures in his primer. She would sit
next to him in the kitchen while he was doing his homework, and she learned
more than he did.
Rino was almost six years older than Lila; he was a fearless boy who shone in
all  the  courtyard  and  street  games,  especially  spinning  a  top.  But  reading,
writing, arithmetic, learning poems by heart were not for him. When he was
scarcely ten his father, Fernando, had begun to take him every day to his tiny
shoemaker’s shop, in a narrow side street that ran off the stradone, to teach
him the craft of resoling shoes. We girls, when we met him, smelled on him the
odor of dirty feet, of old uppers, of glue, and we made fun of him, we called him
shoe-soler. Maybe that’s why he boasted that he was at the origin of his sister’s
virtuosity. But in reality he had never had a primer, and hadn’t sat for even a
minute, ever, to do homework. Impossible therefore that Lila had learned from
his scholastic labors. It was more likely that she had precociously learned how
the  alphabet  worked  from  the  sheets  of  newspaper  in  which  customers
wrapped the old shoes and which her father sometimes brought home and
read to the family the most interesting local news items.
Anyway, however it had happened, the fact was this: Lila knew how to read
and  write,  and  what  I  remember  of  that  gray  morning  when  the  teacher
revealed it to us was, above all, the sense of weakness the news left me with.
Right away, from the first day, school had seemed to me a much nicer place
than home. It was the place in the neighborhood where I felt safest, I went
there with excitement. I paid attention to the lessons, I carried out with the
greatest diligence everything that I was told to carry out, I learned. But most of
all I liked pleasing the teacher, I liked pleasing everyone. At home I was my
father’s favorite, and my brothers and sister, too, loved me. The problem was
my mother; with her things never took the right course. It seemed to me that,
though I was barely six, she did her best to make me understand that I was
superfluous in her life. I wasn’t agreeable to her nor was she to me. Her body
repulsed me, something she probably intuited. She was a dark blonde, blue-
eyed, voluptuous. But you never knew where her right eye was looking. Nor
did her right leg work properly—she called it the damaged leg. She limped, and
her step agitated me, especially at night, when she couldn’t sleep and walked
along the hall to the kitchen, returned, started again. Sometimes I heard her
angrily crushing with her heel the cockroaches that came through the front
door, and I imagined her with furious eyes, as when she got mad at me.
Certainly she wasn’t happy; the household chores wore her down, and there
was never enough money. She often got angry with my father, a porter at the
city hall, she shouted that he had to come up with something, she couldn’t go
on like this. They quarreled. But since my father never raised his voice, even
when  he  lost  patience,  I  always  took  his  part  against  her,  even  though  he
sometimes beat her and could be threatening to me. It was he, and not my
mother, who said to me, the first day of school: “Lenuccia, do well with the
teacher and we’ll let you go to school. But if you’re not good, if you’re not the
best, Papa needs help and you’ll go to work.” Those words had really scared
me, and yet, although he said them, I felt it was my mother who had suggested
them, imposed them. I had promised them both that I would be good. And
things had immediately gone so well that the teacher often said to me:
“Greco, come and sit next to me.”
It was a great privilege. Maestra Oliviero always had an empty chair next to
her, and the best students were called on to sit there, as a reward. In the early
days, I was always sitting beside her. She urged me on with encouraging words,
she praised my blond curls, and thus reinforced in me the wish to do well:
completely the opposite of my mother, who, at home, so often rebuked me,
sometimes abusively, that I wanted to hide in a dark corner and hope that she
wouldn’t find me. Then it happened that Signora Cerullo came to class and
Maestra Oliviero revealed that Lila was far ahead of us. Not only that: she
called on her to sit next to her more often than on me. What that demotion
caused inside me I don’t know, I find it difficult to say, today, faithfully and
clearly what I felt. Perhaps nothing at first, some jealousy, like everyone else.
But  surely  it  was  then  that  a  worry  began  to  take  shape.  I  thought  that,
although my legs functioned perfectly well, I ran the constant risk of becoming
crippled. I woke with that idea in my head and I got out of bed right away to
see if my legs still worked. Maybe that’s why I became focused on Lila, who had
slender, agile legs, and was always moving them, kicking even when she was
sitting next to the teacher, so that the teacher became irritated and soon sent
her back to her desk. Something convinced me, then, that if I kept up with her,
at her pace, my mother’s limp, which had entered into my brain and wouldn’t
come out, would stop threatening me. I decided that I had to model myself on
that girl, never let her out of my sight, even if she got annoyed and chased me
away.
8.
I suppose that that was my way of reacting to envy, and hatred, and of
suffocating  them.  Or  maybe  I  disguised  in  that  manner  the  sense  of
subordination, the fascination I felt. Certainly I trained myself to accept readily
Lila’s superiority in everything, and even her oppressions.
Besides, the teacher acted very shrewdly. It was true that she often called on
Lila to sit next to her, but she seemed to do it more to make her behave than to
reward her. She continued, in fact, to praise Marisa Sarratore, Carmela Peluso,
and, especially, me. She let me shine with a vivid light, she encouraged me to
become more and more disciplined, more diligent, more serious. When Lila
stopped misbehaving and effortlessly outdid me, the teacher praised me first,
with moderation, and then went on to exalt her prowess. I felt the poison of
defeat more acutely when it was Sarratore or Peluso who did better than me. If,
however, I came in second after Lila, I wore a meek expression of acquiescence.
In  those  years  I  think  I  feared  only  one  thing:  not  being  paired,  in  the
hierarchy established by Maestra Oliviero, with Lila; not to hear the teacher
say proudly, Cerullo and Greco are the best. If one day she had said, the best
are Cerullo and Sarratore, or Cerullo and Peluso, I would have died on the spot.
So I used all my childish energies not to become first in the class—it seemed to
me impossible to succeed there—but not to slip into third, fourth, last place. I
devoted myself to studying and to many things that were difficult, alien to me,
just so I could keep pace with that terrible, dazzling girl.
Dazzling to me. To our classmates Lila was only terrible. From first grade to
fifth,  she  was,  because  of  the  principal  and  partly  also  because  of  Maestra
Oliviero, the most hated child in the school and the neighborhood.
At  least  twice  a  year  the  principal  had  the  classes  compete  against  one
another, in order to distinguish the most brilliant students and consequently
the most competent teachers. Oliviero liked this competition. Our teacher, in
permanent conflict with her colleagues, with whom she sometimes seemed
near coming to blows, used Lila and me as the blazing proof of how good she
was, the best teacher in the neighborhood elementary school. So she would
often  bring  us  to  other  classes,  apart  from  the  occasions  arranged  by  the
principal, to compete with the other children, girls and boys. Usually, I was
sent on reconnaissance, to test the enemy’s level of skill. In general I won, but
without overdoing it, without humiliating either teachers or students. I was a
pretty little girl with blond curls, happy to show off but not aggressive, and I
gave an impression of delicacy that was touching. If then I was the best at
reciting poems, repeating the times tables, doing division and multiplication,
at  rattling  off  the  Maritime,  Cottian,  Graia,  and  Pennine  Alps,  the  other
teachers gave me a pat anyway, while the students felt how hard I had worked
to memorize all those facts, and didn’t hate me.
In  Lila’s  case  it  was  different.  Even  by  first  grade  she  was  beyond  any
possible competition. In fact, the teacher said that with a little application she
would be able to take the test for second grade and, not yet seven, go into
third. Later the gap increased. Lila did really complicated calculations in her
head, in her dictations there was not a single mistake, she spoke in dialect like
the rest of us but, when necessary, came out with a bookish Italian, using
words like “accustomed,” “luxuriant,” “willingly.” So that, when the teacher
sent her into the field to give the moods or tenses of verbs or solve math
problems, hearts grew bitter. Lila was too much for anyone.
Besides, she offered no openings to kindness. To recognize her virtuosity
was for us children to admit that we would never win and so there was no
point in competing, and for the teachers to confess to themselves that they
had been mediocre children. Her quickness of mind was like a hiss, a dart, a
lethal bite. And there was nothing in her appearance that acted as a corrective.
She was disheveled, dirty, on her knees and elbows she always had scabs from
cuts and scrapes that never had time to heal. Her large, bright eyes could
become cracks behind which, before every brilliant response, there was a gaze
that appeared not very childlike and perhaps not even human. Every one of
her movements said that to harm her would be pointless because, whatever
happened, she would find a way of doing worse to you.
The hatred was therefore tangible; I was aware of it. Both girls and boys
were irritated by her, but the boys more openly. For a hidden motive of her
own, in fact, Maestra Oliviero especially enjoyed taking us to the classes where
the girl students and women teachers could not be humiliated so much as the
males.  And  the  principal,  too,  for  equally  hidden  motives,  preferred
competitions of this type. Later I thought that in the school they were betting
money, maybe even a lot, on those meetings of ours. But I was exaggerating:
maybe it was just a way of giving vent to old grudges or allowing the principal
to keep the less good or less obedient teachers under his control. The fact is
that one morning the two of us, who were then in second grade, were taken to
a fourth-grade class, Maestro Ferraro’s, in which were both Enzo Scanno, the
fierce  son  of  the  fruit  and  vegetable  seller,  and  Nino  Sarratore,  Marisa’s
brother, whom I loved.
Everyone knew Enzo. He was a repeater and at least a couple of times had
been dragged through the classrooms with a card around his neck on which
Maestro Ferraro, a tall, very thin man, with very short gray hair, a small, lined
face, and worried eyes, had written “Dunce.” Nino on the other hand was so
good, so meek, so quiet that he was well known and liked, especially by me.
Naturally Enzo hardly counted, scholastically speaking, we kept an eye on him
only because he was aggressive. Our adversaries, in matters of intelligence,
were Nino and—we discovered just then—Alfonso Carracci, the third child of
Don Achille, a very neat boy, who was in second grade, like us, but looked
younger than his seven years. It was clear that the teacher had brought him
there to the fourth-grade class because he had more faith in him than in Nino,
who was almost two years older.
There  was  some  tension  between  Oliviero  and  Ferraro  because  of  that
unexpected summoning of Carracci, then the competition began, in front of
the two classes, assembled in one classroom. They asked us verbs, they asked
us times tables, they asked us addition, subtraction, multiplication, division
(the  four  operations),  first  at  the  blackboard,  then  in  our  heads.  Of  that
particular occasion I remember three things. The first is that little Alfonso
Carracci defeated me immediately, he was calm and precise, but he had the
quality of not gloating. The second is that Nino Sarratore, surprisingly, almost
never answered the questions, but appeared dazed, as if he didn’t understand
what the teachers were asking him. The third is that Lila stood up to the son of
Don Achille reluctantly, as if she didn’t care if he beat her. The scene grew
lively  only  when  they  began  to  do  calculations  in  their  heads,  addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division. Alfonso, despite Lila’s reluctance and,
at times, silence, as if she hadn’t heard the question, began to slip, making
mistakes especially in multiplication and division. On the other hand, if the son
of Don Achille failed, Lila wasn’t up to it, either, and so they seemed more or
less equal. But at a certain point something unexpected happened. At least
twice, when Lila didn’t answer or Alfonso made a mistake, the voice of Enzo
Scanno, filled with contempt, was heard, from a desk at the back, giving the
right answer.
This astonished the class, the teachers, the principal, me, and Lila. How was
it possible that someone like Enzo, who was lazy, incapable, and delinquent,
could do complicated calculations in his head better than me, than Alfonso
Carracci, than Nino Sarratore? Suddenly Lila seemed to wake up. Alfonso was
quickly out of the running and, with the proud consent of Ferraro, who quickly
exchanged champions, a duel began between Lila and Enzo.
The two competed for a long time. The principal, going over Ferraro’s head,
called the son of the fruit and vegetable seller to the front of the room, next to
Lila. Enzo left the back row amid uneasy laughter, his own and his friends’, and
positioned himself, sullen and uneasy, next to the blackboard, opposite Lila.
The  duel  continued,  as  they  did  increasingly  difficult  calculations  in  their
heads. The boy gave his answers in dialect, as if he were on the street and not
in a classroom, and Ferraro corrected his diction, but the figure was always
correct.  Enzo  seemed  extremely  proud  of  that  moment  of  glory,  amazed
himself at how clever he was. Then he began to slip, because Lila had woken up
conclusively,  and  now  her  eyes  had  narrowed  in  determination,  and  she
answered correctly. In the end Enzo lost. He lost but was not resigned. He
began to curse, to shout ugly obscenities. Ferraro sent him to kneel behind the
blackboard, but he wouldn’t go. He was rapped on the knuckles with the rod
and then pulled by the ears to the punishment corner. The school day ended
like that.
But from then on the gang of boys began to throw rocks at us.
9.
That morning of the duel between Enzo and Lila is important, in our long
story. Many modes of behavior started off there that were difficult to decipher.
For example it became very clear that Lila could, if she wanted, ration the use
of her abilities. That was what she had done with Don Achille’s son. She did not
want to beat him, but she had also calibrated silences and answers in such a
way as not to be beaten. We had not yet become friends and I couldn’t ask her
why she had behaved like that. But really there was no need to ask questions, I
could guess the reason. Like me, she, too, had been forbidden to offend not
only Don Achille but also his family.
It  was  like  that.  We  didn’t  know  the  origin  of  that  fear-rancor-hatred-
meekness that our parents displayed toward the Carraccis and transmitted to
us, but it was there, it was a fact, like the neighborhood, its dirty-white houses,
the fetid odor of the landings, the dust of the streets. In all likelihood Nino
Sarratore, too, had been silent in order to allow Alfonso to be at his best.
Handsome, slender, and nervous, with long lashes, hair neatly combed, he had
stammered only a few words and had finally been silent. To continue to love
him, I wanted to think that was what it had been. But deep down I had some
doubts. Had it been a choice, like Lila’s? I wasn’t sure. I had stepped aside
because  Alfonso  really  was  better  than  me.  Lila  could  have  defeated  him
immediately,  yet  she  had  chosen  to  aim  for  a  tie.  And  Nino?  There  was
something that confused and perhaps saddened me: not an inability, not even
surrender, but, I would say today, a collapse. That stammer, the pallor, the
purple  that  had  suddenly  swallowed  his  eyes:  how  handsome  he  was,  so
languid, and yet how much I disliked his languor.
Lila, too, at a certain point had seemed very beautiful to me. In general I was
the pretty one, while she was skinny, like a salted anchovy, she gave off an
odor of wildness, she had a long face, narrow at the temples, framed by two
bands of smooth black hair. But when she decided to vanquish both Alfonso
and Enzo, she had lighted up like a holy warrior. Her cheeks flushed, the sign of
a flame released by every corner of her body, and for the first time I thought:
Lila is prettier than I am. So I was second in everything. I hoped that no one
would ever realize it.
But the most important thing that morning was the discovery that a phrase
we  often  used  to  avoid  punishment  contained  something  true,  hence
uncontrollable, hence dangerous. The formula was: I didn’t do it on purpose.
Enzo,  in  fact,  had  not  entered  the  competition  deliberately  and  had  not
deliberately defeated Alfonso. Lila had deliberately defeated Enzo but had not
deliberately defeated Alfonso or deliberately humiliated him; it had been only
a necessary step. The conclusion we drew from this convinced us that it was
best to do everything on purpose, deliberately, so that you would know what to
expect.
Because almost nothing had been done deliberately, many unforeseen things
struck us, one after the other. Alfonso went home in tears as a result of his
defeat. His brother Stefano, who was fourteen, an apprentice in the grocery
store (the former workshop of the carpenter Peluso) owned by his father—
who, however, never set foot in it—showed up outside school the next day and
said very nasty things to Lila, to the point of threatening her. She yelled an
obscenity  at  him,  and  he  pushed  her  against  a  wall  and  tried  to  grab  her
tongue, shouting that he would prick it with a pin. Lila went home and told her
brother Rino everything, and the more she talked, the redder he got, his eyes
bright. In the meantime Enzo, going home one night without his country gang,
was stopped by Stefano and punched and kicked. Rino, in the morning, went to
look for Stefano and they had a fight, giving each other a more or less equal
beating. A few days later the wife of Don Achille, Donna Maria, knocked on the
Cerullos’ door and made a scene with Nunzia, shouting and insulting her. A
little  time  passed  and  one  Sunday,  after  Mass,  Fernando  Cerullo  the
shoemaker, the father of Lila and Rino, a small, thin man, timidly accosted Don
Achille and apologized, without ever saying what he was apologizing for. I
didn’t see it, or at least I don’t remember it, but it was said that the apologies
were made aloud, and in such a way that everyone could hear, even though
Don Achille had walked by as if the shoemaker were not speaking to him.
Sometime later Lila and I wounded Enzo in the calf with a stone and Enzo
threw a stone that hit Lila in the head. While I was shrieking in fear and Lila
got  up  with  the  blood  dripping  from  under  her  hair,  Enzo,  who  was  also
bleeding, climbed down the embankment, and, seeing Lila in that state, he,
utterly unpredictably and to our eyes incomprehensibly, began to cry. Then
Rino, Lila’s adored brother, came to school and, outside, beat up Enzo, who
barely defended himself. Rino was older, bigger, and more motivated. Not only
that: Enzo didn’t mention that beating to his gang or his mother or his father
or his brothers or his cousins, who all worked in the countryside and sold fruit
and vegetables from a cart. At that point, thanks to him, the feuds ended.
10.
Lila went around proudly for a while, with her head bandaged. Then she
took off the bandage and showed anyone who asked the black scar, red at the
edges, that stuck out on her forehead under the hairline. Finally people forgot
what had happened and if someone stared at the whitish mark left on her skin,
she made an aggressive gesture that meant: what are you looking at, mind your
own business. To me she never said anything, not even a word of thanks for
the rocks I had handed her, for how I had dried the blood with the edge of my
smock. But from that moment she began to subject me to proofs of courage
that had nothing to do with school.
We saw each other in the courtyard more and more frequently. We showed
off our dolls to each other but without appearing to, one in the other’s vicinity,
as if each of us were alone. At some point we let the dolls meet, as a test, to see
if they got along. And so came the day when we sat next to the cellar window
with the curled grating and exchanged our dolls, she holding mine and I hers,
and Lila abruptly pushed Tina through the opening in the grating and dropped
her.
I felt an unbearable sorrow. I was attached to my plastic doll; it was the most
precious possession I had. I knew that Lila was mean, but I had never expected
her to do something so spiteful to me. For me the doll was alive, to know that
she was on the floor of the cellar, amid the thousand beasts that lived there,
threw me into despair. But that day I learned a skill at which I later excelled. I
held back my despair, I held it back on the edge of my wet eyes, so that Lila
said to me in dialect:
“You don’t care about her?”
I didn’t answer. I felt a violent pain, but I sensed that the pain of quarreling
with her would be even stronger. I was as if strangled by two agonies, one
already happening, the loss of the doll, and one possible, the loss of Lila. I said
nothing, I only acted, without spite, as if it were natural, even if it wasn’t
natural and I knew I was taking a great risk. I merely threw into the cellar her
Nu, the doll she had just given me.
Lila looked at me in disbelief.
“What you do, I do,” I recited immediately, aloud, very frightened.
“Now go and get it for me.”
“If you go and get mine.”
We went together. At the entrance to the building, on the left, was the door
that led to the cellars, we knew it well. Because it was broken—one of the
panels was hanging on just one hinge—the entrance was blocked by a chain
that crudely held the two panels together. Every child was tempted and at the
same time terrified by the possibility of forcing the door that little bit that
would make it possible to go through to the other side. We did it. We made a
space  wide  enough  for  our  slender,  supple  bodies  to  slip  through  into  the
cellar.
Once inside, we descended, Lila in the lead, five stone steps into a damp
space, dimly lit by the narrow openings at street level. I was afraid, and tried to
stay close behind Lila, but she seemed angry, and intent on finding her doll. I
groped  my  way  forward.  I  felt  under  the  soles  of  my  sandals  objects  that
squeaked, glass, gravel, insects. All around were things not identifiable, dark
masses, sharp or square or rounded. The faint light that pierced the darkness
sometimes fell on something recognizable: the skeleton of a chair, the pole of a
lamp, fruit boxes, the bottoms and sides of wardrobes, iron hinges. I got scared
by what seemed to me a soft face, with large glass eyes, that lengthened into a
chin shaped like a box. I saw it hanging, with its desolate expression, on a
rickety wooden stand, and I cried out to Lila, pointing to it. She turned and
slowly approached it, with her back to me, carefully extended one hand, and
detached it from the stand. Then she turned around. She had put the face with
the glass eyes over hers and now her face was enormous, with round, empty
eye sockets and no mouth, only that protruding black chin swinging over her
chest.
Those are moments which are stamped into memory. I’m not sure, but I
must have let out a cry of real terror, because she hurried to say, in an echoing
voice, that it was just a mask, an anti-gas mask: that’s what her father called it,
he had one like it in the storeroom at home. I continued to tremble and moan
with fear, which evidently persuaded her to tear the thing off her face and
throw it in a corner, causing a loud noise and a lot of dust that thickened amid
the tongues of light from the windows.
I calmed down. Lila looked around, identified the opening from which we
had dropped Tina and Nu. We went along the rough bumpy wall, we looked
into the shadows. The dolls weren’t there. Lila repeated in dialect, they’re not
there, they’re not there, they’re not there, and searched along the floor with
her hands, something I didn’t have the courage to do.
Long minutes passed. Once only I seemed to see Tina and with a tug at my
heart  I  bent  over  to  grab  her,  but  it  was  only  a  crumpled  page  of  old
newspaper. They aren’t here, Lila repeated, and headed toward the door. Then
I felt lost, unable to stay there by myself and keep searching, unable to leave if
I hadn’t found my doll.
At the top of the steps she said:
“Don Achille took them, he put them in his black bag.”
And at that very moment I heard him, Don Achille: he slithered, he shuffled
among the indistinct shapes of things. Then I abandoned Tina to her fate, and
ran away, in order not to lose Lila, who was already twisting nimbly between
the panels of the broken door.
11.
I  believed  everything  she  told  me.  The  shapeless  mass  of  Don  Achille
running  through  the  underground  tunnels,  arms  dangling,  large  fingers
grasping Nu’s head in one hand, in the other Tina’s. I suffered terribly. I got
sick, had fevers, got better, got sick again. I was overcome by a kind of tactile
dysfunction; sometimes I had the impression that, while every animated being
around me was speeding up the rhythms of its life, solid surfaces turned soft
under my fingers or swelled up, leaving empty spaces between their internal
mass and the surface skin. It seemed to me that my own body, if you touched it,
was distended, and this saddened me. I was sure that I had cheeks like balloons,
hands stuffed with sawdust, earlobes like ripe berries, feet in the shape of
loaves of bread. When I returned to the streets and to school, I felt that the
space, too, had changed. It seemed to be chained between two dark poles: on
one side was the underground air bubble that pressed on the roots of the
houses, the threatening cavern the dolls had fallen into; on the other the upper
sphere, on the fourth floor of the building where Don Achille, who had stolen
them, lived. The two balls were as if screwed to the ends of an iron bar, which
in  my  imagination  obliquely  crossed  the  apartments,  the  streets,  the
countryside,  the  tunnel,  the  railroad  tracks,  and  compressed  them.  I  felt
squeezed in that vise along with the mass of everyday things and people, and I
had a bad taste in my mouth, a permanent sense of nausea that exhausted me,
as if everything, thus compacted, and always tighter, were grinding me up,
reducing me to a repulsive cream.
It was an enduring malaise, lasting perhaps years, beyond early adolescence.
But unexpectedly, just when it began, I received my first declaration of love.
It was before Lila and I had attempted to climb the stairs to Don Achille’s,
and my grief at the loss of Tina was still unbearable. I had gone reluctantly to
buy bread. My mother had sent me and I was going home, the change clutched
in my fist and the loaf still warm against my chest, when I realized that Nino
Sarratore was trudging behind me, holding his little brother by the hand. On
summer days his mother, Lidia, always sent him out with Pino, who at the time
was no more than five, with the injunction never to leave him. Near a corner, a
little past the Carraccis’ grocery, Nino was about to pass me, but instead of
passing he cut off my path, pushed me against the wall, placed his free hand
against the wall as a bar, to keep me from running away, and with the other
pulled  up  beside  him  his  brother,  a  silent  witness  of  his  undertaking.
Breathlessly he said something I couldn’t understand. He was pale, and he
smiled, then he became serious, then he smiled again. Finally he said, in school
Italian:
“When we grow up I want to marry you.”
Then he asked if in the meantime I would be engaged to him. He was a little
taller than me, very thin, with a long neck, his ears sticking out a little from his
head. He had rebellious hair, and intense eyes with long lashes. The effort he
was making to restrain his timidity was touching. Although I also wanted to
marry him, I felt like answering:
“No, I can’t.”
He was stunned, Pino gave him a tug. I ran away.
From that moment I began to sneak into a side street whenever I saw him.
And yet he seemed to me so handsome. How many times had I hung around his
sister Marisa just to be near him and walk part of the way home with them. But
he had made the declaration at the wrong moment. He couldn’t know how
undone I felt, how much anguish Tina’s disappearance had caused me, how
exhausting the effort of keeping up with Lila was, how the compressed space of
the courtyard, the buildings, the neighborhood cut off my breath. After giving
me many long, frightened glances from a distance, he began to avoid me, too.
For a while he must have been afraid that I would tell the other girls, and in
particular his sister, about the proposal he had made. Everyone knew that
Gigliola Spagnuolo, the daughter of the baker, had done that when Enzo had
asked her to be his girlfriend. And Enzo had found out and got angry, he had
shouted outside school that she was a liar, he had even threatened to kill her
with a knife. I, too, was tempted to tell everything, but then I let it go, I didn’t
tell anyone, not even Lila when we became friends. Slowly I forgot about it
myself.
It came to mind again when, some time later, the entire Sarratore family
moved. One morning the cart and horse that belonged to Assunta’s husband,
Nicola, appeared in the courtyard: with that same cart and that same old horse
he sold fruit and vegetables with his wife, going up and down the streets of the
neighborhood. Nicola had a broad handsome face and the same blue eyes, the
same blond hair as his son Enzo. Besides selling fruit and vegetables, he was
the mover. And in fact he, Donato Sarratore, Nino himself, and Lidia, too, began
to carry things downstairs, all sorts of odds and ends, mattresses, furniture,
and piled it on the cart.
As soon as the women heard the sound of wheels in the courtyard, they
looked out, including my mother, including me. There was a great curiosity. It
seemed that Donato had got a new house directly from the state railroad, in
the neighborhood of a square called Piazza Nazionale. Or—said my mother—his
wife  had  obliged  him  to  move  to  escape  the  persecutions  of  Melina,  who
wanted to take away her husband. Likely. My mother always saw evil where, to
my great annoyance, it was sooner or later discovered that evil really was, and
her crossed eye seemed made purposely to identify the secret motives of the
neighborhood. How would Melina react? Was it true, as I had heard whispered,
that she had had a child with Sarratore and then killed it? And was it possible
that she would start shouting terrible things, including that? All the females,
big and small, were at the windows, perhaps to wave goodbye to the family
that was leaving, perhaps to witness the spectacle of rage of that ugly, lean,
and  widowed  woman.  I  saw  that  Lila  and  her  mother,  Nunzia,  were  also
watching.
I sought Nino’s gaze, but he seemed to have other things to do. I was then
seized, as usual for no precise reason, by a weariness that made everything
around me faint. I thought that perhaps he had made that declaration because
he already knew that he would be leaving and wanted to tell me first what he
felt for me. I looked at him as he struggled to carry boxes filled to overflowing,
and I felt the guilt, the sorrow of having said no. Now he was fleeing like a bird.
Finally the procession of furniture and household goods stopped. Nicola and
Donato began to tie everything to the cart with ropes. Lidia Sarratore appeared
dressed as if to go to a party, she had even put on a summer hat, of blue straw.
She pushed the carriage with her youngest boy in it and beside her she had the
two girls, Marisa, who was my age, eight or nine, and Clelia, six. Suddenly there
was a noise of things breaking on the second floor. Almost at the same moment
Melina began screaming. Her cries were so tortured that Lila, I saw, put her
hands over her ears. The pained voice of Ada, Melina’s second child, echoed as
she cried, Mamma, no, Mamma. After a moment of uncertainty I, too, covered
my ears. But meanwhile objects began to fly out the window and curiosity
became so strong that I freed my eardrums, as if I needed clear sounds to
understand. Melina, however, wasn’t uttering words but only aaah, aaah, as if
she were wounded. She couldn’t be seen, not even an arm or a hand that was
throwing things could be seen. Copper pots, glasses, bottles, plates appeared to
fly out the window of their own volition, and in the street Lidia Sarratore
walked with her head down, leaning over the baby carriage, her daughters
behind, while Donato climbed up on the cart amid his property, and Don Nicola
guided the horse by the bridle and meanwhile objects hit the asphalt, bounced,
shattered, sending splinters between the nervous hooves of the beast.
I looked at Lila. Now I saw another face, a face of bewilderment. She must
have realized that I was looking at her, and she immediately disappeared from
the window. Meanwhile the cart started off. Keeping to the wall, without a
goodbye to anyone, Lidia and the four youngest children slunk toward the
gate, while Nino seemed unwilling to leave, as if hypnotized by the waste of
fragile objects against the asphalt.
Last I saw flying out the window a sort of black spot. It was an iron, pure
steel. When I still had Tina and played in the house, I used my mother’s, which
was identical, prow-shaped, pretending it was a ship in a storm. The object
plummeted down and with a sharp thud made a hole in the ground, a few
inches from Nino. It nearly—very nearly—killed him.
12.
No boy ever declared to Lila that he loved her, and she never told me if it
grieved her. Gigliola Spagnuolo received proposals to be someone’s girlfriend
continuously and I, too, was much in demand. Lila, on the other hand, wasn’t
popular, mostly because she was skinny, dirty, and always had a cut or bruise
of  some  sort,  but  also  because  she  had  a  sharp  tongue.  She  invented
humiliating nicknames and although in front of the teacher she showed off
Italian words that no one knew, with us she spoke a scathing dialect, full of
swear words, which cut off at its origin any feeling of love. Only Enzo did a
thing that, if it wasn’t exactly a request to be her boyfriend, was nevertheless a
sign of admiration and respect. Some time after he had cut her head with the
rock and before, it seems to me, he was rejected by Gigliola Spagnuolo, he ran
into us on the stradone and, before my incredulous eyes, held out to Lila a
garland of sorb apples.
“What do I do with it?”
“You eat them.”
“Bitter?”
“Let them ripen.”
“I don’t want them.”
“Throw them away.”
That was it. Enzo turned his back and hurried off to work. Lila and I started
laughing. We didn’t talk much, but we had a laugh at everything that happened
to us. I said only, in a tone of amusement: “I like sorb apples.”
I was lying, it was a fruit I didn’t like. I was attracted by their reddish-yellow
color when they were unripe, their compactness that gleamed on sunny days.
But when they ripened on the balconies and became brown and soft like small
wrinkled pears, and the skin came off easily, displaying a grainy pulp not with
a bad taste but spongy in a way that reminded me of the corpses of rats along
the stradone, then I wouldn’t even touch them. I made that statement almost as
a test, hoping that Lila would offer them to me: here, take them, you have
them. I felt that if she had given me the gift that Enzo had given her I would be
happier than if she had given me something of hers. But she didn’t, and I still
recall the feeling of betrayal when she brought them home. She herself put a
nail at the window. I saw her hang the garland on it.
13.
Enzo didn’t give her any other gifts. After the fight with Gigliola, who had
told everyone about the declaration he had made to her, we saw him less and
less. Although he had proved to be extremely good at doing sums in his head,
he was lazy, so the teacher didn’t suggest that he take the admissions test for
the middle school, and he wasn’t sorry about it, in fact he was pleased. He
enrolled  in  the  trade  school,  but  in  fact  he  was  already  working  with  his
parents. He got up very early to go with his father to the fruit-and-vegetable
market or to drive the cart through the neighborhood, selling produce from
the countryside, and so he soon quit school.
We, instead, toward the end of fifth grade, were told that it would be suitable
for us to continue in school. The teacher summoned in turn my parents and
those of Gigliola and Lila to tell them that we absolutely had to take not only
the test for the elementary school diploma but also the one for admission to
middle school. I did all I could so that my father would not send my mother,
with  her  limp,  her  wandering  eye,  and  her  stubborn  anger,  but  would  go
himself, since he was a porter and knew how to be polite. I didn’t succeed. She
went, she talked to the teacher, and returned home in a sullen mood.
“The teacher wants money. She says she has to give some extra lessons
because the test is difficult.”
“But what’s the point of this test?” my father asked.
“To let her study Latin.”
“Why?”
“Because they say she’s clever.”
“But if she’s clever, why does the teacher have to give her lessons that cost
money?”
“So she’ll be better off and we’ll be worse.”
They discussed it at length. At first my mother was against it and my father
uncertain; then my father became cautiously in favor and my mother resigned
herself to being a little less against it; finally they decided to let me take the
test, but always provided that if I did not do well they would immediately take
me out of school.
Lila’s  parents  on  the  other  hand  said  no.  Nunzia  Cerullo  made  a  few
somewhat hesitant attempts, but her father wouldn’t even talk about it, and in
fact hit Rino when he told him that he was wrong. Her parents were inclined
not to go and see the teacher, but Maestra Oliviero had the principal summon
them, and then Nunzia had to go. Faced with the timid but flat refusal of that
frightened woman, Maestra Oliviero, stern but calm, displayed Lila’s marvelous
compositions,  the  brilliant  solutions  to  difficult  problems,  and  even  the
beautifully colored drawings that in class, when she applied herself, enchanted
us  all,  because,  pilfering  Giotto’s  pastels,  she  portrayed  in  a  realistic  style
princesses with hairdos, jewels, clothes, shoes that had never been seen in any
book or even at the parish cinema. When the refusal persisted, the teacher lost
her composure and dragged Lila’s mother to the principal as if she were a
student to be disciplined. But Nunzia couldn’t yield, she didn’t have permission
from her husband. As a result she kept saying no until she, the teacher, and the
principal were overcome by exhaustion.
The next day, as we were going to school, Lila said to me in her usual tone:
I’m going to take the test anyway. I believed her, to forbid her to do something
was pointless, everyone knew it. She seemed the strongest of us girls, stronger
than  Enzo,  than  Alfonso,  than  Stefano,  stronger  than  her  brother  Rino,
stronger than our parents, stronger than all the adults including the teacher
and the carabinieri, who could put you in jail. Although she was fragile in
appearance, every prohibition lost substance in her presence. She knew how to
go beyond the limit without ever truly suffering the consequences. In the end
people gave in, and were even, however unwillingly, compelled to praise her.
14.
We were also forbidden to go to Don Achille’s, but she decided to go anyway
and I followed. In fact, that was when I became convinced that nothing could
stop her, and that every disobedient act contained breathtaking opportunities.
We wanted Don Achille to give us back our dolls. So we climbed the stairs: at
every  step  I  was  on  the  point  of  turning  around  and  going  back  to  the
courtyard. I still feel Lila’s hand grasping mine, and I like to think that she
decided  to  take  it  not  only  because  she  intuited  that  I  wouldn’t  have  the
courage to get to the top floor but also because with that gesture she herself
sought the force to continue. So, one beside the other, I on the wall side and
she on the banister side, sweaty palms clasped, we climbed the last flights. At
Don Achille’s door my heart was pounding, I could hear it in my ears, but I was
consoled  by  thinking  that  it  was  also  the  sound  of  Lila’s  heart.  From  the
apartment came voices, perhaps of Alfonso or Stefano or Pinuccia. After a very
long, silent pause before the door, Lila rang the bell. There was silence, then a
shuffling. Donna Maria opened the door, wearing a faded green housedress.
When she spoke, I saw a brilliant gold tooth in her mouth. She thought we
were looking for Alfonso, and was a bit bewildered. Lila said to her in dialect:
“No, we want Don Achille.”
“Tell me.”
“We have to speak to him.”
The woman shouted, “Achì!”
More shuffling. A thickset figure emerged from the shadows. He had a long
torso, short legs, arms that hung to his knees, and a cigarette in his mouth; you
could see the embers. He asked hoarsely: “Who is it?”
“The daughter of the shoemaker with Greco’s oldest daughter.”
Don Achille came into the light, and, for the first time, we saw him clearly.
No minerals, no sparkle of glass. His long face was of flesh, and the hair bristled
only around his ears; the top of his head was shiny. His eyes were bright, the
white veined with small red streams, his mouth wide and thin, his chin heavy,
with a crease in the middle. He seemed to me ugly but not the way I imagined.
“Well?”
“The dolls,” said Lila.
“What dolls?”
“Ours.”
“Your dolls are of no use here.”
“You took them down in the cellar.”
Don Achille turned and shouted into the apartment: “Pinù, did you take the
doll belonging to the shoemaker’s daughter?”
“Me, no.”
“Alfò, did you take it?”
Laughter.
Lila said firmly, I don’t know where she got all that courage: “You took them,
we saw you.”
There was a moment of silence.
“ ‘You’ me?”
“Yes, and you put them in your black bag.”
The man, hearing those words, wrinkled his forehead in annoyance.
I couldn’t believe that we were there, in front of Don Achille, and Lila was
speaking to him like that and he was staring at her in bewilderment, and in the
background could be seen Alfonso and Stefano and Pinuccia and Donna Maria,
who was setting the table for dinner. I couldn’t believe that he was an ordinary
person, a little short, a little bald, a little out of proportion, but ordinary. So I
waited for him to be abruptly transformed.
Don Achille repeated, as if to understand clearly the meaning of the words:
“I took your dolls and put them in a black bag?”
I felt that he was not angry but unexpectedly pained, as if he were receiving
confirmation of something he already knew. He said something in dialect that I
didn’t understand, Maria cried, “Achì, it’s ready.”
“I’m coming.”
Don Achille stuck a large, broad hand in the back pocket of his pants. We
clutched each other’s hand tightly, waiting for him to bring out a knife. Instead
he took out his wallet, opened it, looked inside, and handed Lila some money, I
don’t remember how much.
“Go buy yourselves dolls,” he said.
Lila  grabbed  the  money  and  dragged  me  down  the  stairs.  He  muttered,
leaning over the banister: “And remember that they were a gift from me.”
I said, in Italian, careful not to trip on the stairs: “Good evening and enjoy
your meal.”
15.
Right after Easter, Gigliola Spagnuolo and I started going to the teacher’s
house to prepare for the admissions test. The teacher lived right next to the
parish church of the Holy Family, and her windows looked out on the public
gardens; from there you could see, beyond the dense countryside, the pylons of
the railroad. Gigliola passed by my window and called me. I was ready, I ran
out. I liked those private lessons, two a week, I think. The teacher, at the end of
the lesson, offered us little heart-shaped cookies and a soft drink.
Lila didn’t come; her parents had not agreed to pay the teacher. But, since
we were now good friends, she continued to tell me that she would take the
test and would enter the first year of middle school in the same class as me.
“And the books?”
“You’ll lend them to me.”
Meanwhile, however, with the money from Don Achille, she bought a book:
Little Women. She decided to buy it because she already knew it and liked it
hugely. Maestra Oliviero, in fourth grade, had given the smarter girls books to
read. Lila had received Little Women, along with the following comment: “This is
for  older  girls,  but  it  will  be  good  for  you,”  and  I  got  the  book  Heart,  by
Edmondo  De  Amicis,  with  not  a  word  of  explanation.  Lila  read  both  Little
Women and Heart, in a very short time, and said there was no comparison, in
her opinion Little Women was wonderful. I hadn’t managed to read it, I had had
a hard time finishing Heart before the time set by the teacher for returning it. I
was a slow reader, I still am. Lila, when she had to give the book back to
Maestra  Oliviero,  regretted  both  not  being  able  to  reread  Little  Women
continuously and not being able to talk about it with me. So one morning she
made up her mind. She called me from the street, we went to the ponds, to the
place where we had buried the money from Don Achille, in a metal box, took it
out,  and  went  to  ask  Iolanda  the  stationer,  who  had  had  displayed  in  her
window forever a copy of Little Women, yellowed by the sun, if it was enough. It
was.  As  soon  as  we  became  owners  of  the  book  we  began  to  meet  in  the
courtyard to read it, either silently, one next to the other, or aloud. We read it
for months, so many times that the book became tattered and sweat-stained, it
lost its spine, came unthreaded, sections fell apart. But it was our book, we
loved it dearly. I was the guardian, I kept it at home among the schoolbooks,
because Lila didn’t feel she could keep it in her house. Her father, lately, would
get angry if she merely took it out to read.
But Rino protected her. When the subject of the admissions test came up,
quarrels exploded continuously between him and his father. Rino was about
sixteen at the time, he was a very excitable boy and had started a battle to be
paid for the work he did. His reasoning was: I get up at six; I come to the shop
and work till eight at night; I want a salary. But those words outraged his
father and his mother. Rino had a bed to sleep in, food to eat, why did he want
money? His job was to help the family, not impoverish it. But he insisted, he
found it unjust to work as hard as his father and not receive a cent. At that
point  Fernando  Cerullo  answered  him  with  apparent  patience:  “I  pay  you
already, Rino, I pay you generously by teaching you the whole trade: soon
you’ll be able to repair a heel or an edge or put on a new sole; your father is
passing on to you everything he knows, and you’ll be able to make an entire
shoe, with the skill of a professional.” But that payment by instruction was not
enough  for  Rino,  and  so  they  argued,  especially  at  dinner.  They  began  by
talking about money and ended up quarreling about Lila.
“If you pay me I’ll take care of sending her to school,” Rino said.
“School? Why, did I go to school?”
“No.”
“Did you go to school?”
“No.”
“Then why should your sister, who is a girl, go to school?”
The matter almost always ended with a slap in the face for Rino, who, one
way or another, even if he didn’t intend to, had displayed a lack of respect
toward his father. The boy, without crying, apologized in a spiteful tone of
voice.
Lila was silent during those discussions. She never said so, but I had the
impression that while I hated my mother, really hated her, profoundly, she, in
spite of everything, wasn’t upset with her father. She said that he was full of
kindnesses, she said that when there were accounts to do he let her do them,
she said that she had heard him say to his friends that his daughter was the
most intelligent person in the neighborhood, she said that on her name day he
brought her warm chocolate in bed and four biscuits. But what could you do, it
didn’t enter into his view of the world that she should continue to go to school.
Nor did it fall within his economic possibilities: the family was large, they all
had  to  live  off  the  shoe  repair  shop,  including  two  unmarried  sisters  of
Fernando and Nunzia’s parents. So on the matter of school it was like talking to
the wall, and her mother all in all had the same opinion. Only her brother had
different ideas, and fought boldly against his father. And Lila, for reasons I
didn’t understand, seemed certain that Rino would win. He would get his salary
and would send her to school with the money.
“If there’s a fee to pay, he’ll pay it for me,” she explained.
She was sure that her brother would also give her money for the school
books and even for pens, pen case, pastels, globe, the smock and the ribbon.
She adored him. She said that, after she went to school, she wanted to earn a
lot of money for the sole purpose of making her brother the wealthiest person
in the neighborhood.
In that last year of elementary school, wealth became our obsession. We
talked about it the way characters in novels talk about searching for treasure.
We said, when we’re rich we’ll do this, we’ll do that. To listen to us, you might
think that the wealth was hidden somewhere in the neighborhood, in treasure
chests that, when opened, would be gleaming with gold, and were waiting only
for us to find them. Then, I don’t know why, things changed and we began to
link school to wealth. We thought that if we studied hard we would be able to
write books and that the books would make us rich. Wealth was still the glitter
of gold coins stored in countless chests, but to get there all you had to do was
go to school and write a book.
“Let’s write one together,” Lila said once, and that filled me with joy.
Maybe  the  idea  took  root  when  she  discovered  that  the  author  of  Little
Women had made so much money that she had given some of it to her family.
But I wouldn’t promise. We argued about it, I said we could start right after the
admission test. She agreed, but then she couldn’t wait. While I had a lot to
study because of the afternoon lessons with Spagnuolo and the teacher, she
was freer, she set to work and wrote a novel without me.
I was hurt when she brought it to me to read, but I didn’t say anything, in
fact I held in check my disappointment and was full of congratulations. There
were ten sheets of graph paper, folded and held together with a dressmaker’s
pin. It had a cover drawn in pastels, and the title, I remember, was The Blue
Fairy. How exciting it was, how many difficult words there were. I told her to
let the teacher read it. She didn’t want to. I begged her, I offered to give it to
her. Although she wasn’t sure, she agreed.
One  day  when  I  was  at  Maestra  Oliviero’s  house  for  our  lesson,  I  took
advantage of Gigliola being in the bathroom to take out The Blue Fairy. I said it
was a wonderful novel written by Lila and that Lila wanted her to read it. But
the teacher, who for five years had been enthusiastic about everything Lila did,
except when she was bad, replied coldly: “Tell Cerullo that she would do well
to study for the diploma, instead of wasting time.” And although she kept Lila’s
novel, she left it on the table without even giving it a glance.
That attitude confused me. What had happened? Was she angry with Lila’s
mother? Had her rage extended to Lila herself? Was she upset about the money
that the parents of my friend wouldn’t give her? I didn’t understand. A few
days later I cautiously asked her if she had read The Blue Fairy. She answered in
an unusual tone, obscurely, as if only she and I could truly understand.
“Do you know what the plebs are, Greco?”
“Yes, the people, the tribunes of the plebs are the Gracchi.”
“The plebs are quite a nasty thing.”
“Yes.”
“And if one wishes to remain a plebeian, he, his children, the children of his
children deserve nothing. Forget Cerullo and think of yourself.”
Maestra Oliviero never said anything about The Blue Fairy. Lila asked about it
a couple of times, then she let it go. She said grimly: “As soon as I have time I’ll
write another, that one wasn’t good.”
“It was wonderful.”
“It was terrible.”
But she became less lively, especially in class, probably because she realized
that the teacher had stopped praising her, and sometimes seemed irritated by
her excesses of virtuosity. When it came time for the competition at the end of
the year she was still the best, but without her old impudence. At the end of
the  day,  the  principal  presented  to  those  remaining  in  competition—Lila,
Gigliola, and me—an extremely difficult problem that he had invented himself.
Gigliola and I struggled in vain. Lila, narrowing her eyes to cracks, applied
herself. She was the last to give up. She said, with a timidity unusual for her,
that  the  problem  couldn’t  be  solved,  because  there  was  a  mistake  in  the
premise,  but  she  didn’t  know  what  it  was.  Maestra  Oliviero  scolded  her
harshly. I saw Lila standing at the blackboard, chalk in hand, very small and
pale, assaulted by volleys of cruel phrases. I felt her suffering, I couldn’t bear
the trembling of her lower lip and nearly burst into tears.
“When one cannot solve a problem,” the teacher concluded coldly, “one
does not say, There is a mistake in the problem, one says, I am not capable of
solving it.”
The principal was silent. As far as I remember, the day ended there.
16.
Shortly  before  the  final  test  in  elementary  school  Lila  pushed  me  to  do
another of the many things that I would never have had the courage to do by
myself.  We  decided  to  skip  school,  and  cross  the  boundaries  of  the
neighborhood.
It had never happened before. As far back as I could remember, I had never
left  the  four-story  white  apartment  buildings,  the  courtyard,  the  parish
church,  the  public  gardens,  I  had  never  felt  the  urge  to.  Trains  passed
continuously on the other side of the scrubland, trucks and cars passed up and
down along the stradone, and yet I can’t remember a single occasion when I
asked myself, my father, my teacher: where are the cars going, the trucks, the
trains, to what city, to what world?
Nor had Lila appeared particularly interested, but this time she organized
everything. She told me to tell my mother that after school we were all going
to the teacher’s house for a party to mark the end of the school year, and
although I tried to remind her that the teachers had never invited all us girls to
their houses for a party, she said that that was the very reason we should say
it. The event would seem so exceptional that none of our parents would be
bold enough to go to school and ask if it was true or not. As usual, I trusted her,
and things went just as she had said. At my house everyone believed it, not
only my father and my sister and brothers but even my mother.
The  night  before,  I  couldn’t  sleep.  What  was  beyond  the  neighborhood,
beyond its well-known perimeter? Behind us rose a thickly wooded hill and a
few structures in the shelter of the gleaming railroad tracks. In front of us,
beyond the stradone, stretched a pitted road that skirted the ponds. To the
right was a strip of treeless countryside, under an enormous sky. To the left
was a tunnel with three entrances, but if you climbed up to the railroad tracks,
on clear days you could see, beyond some low houses and walls of tufa and
patches of thick vegetation, a blue mountain with one low peak and one a little
higher, which was called Vesuvius and was a volcano.
But nothing that we had before our eyes every day, or that could be seen if
we clambered up the hill, impressed us. Trained by our schoolbooks to speak
with  great  skill  about  what  we  had  never  seen,  we  were  excited  by  the
invisible. Lila said that in the direction of Vesuvius was the sea. Rino, who had
been there, had told her that the water was blue and sparkling, a marvelous
sight. On Sundays, especially in summer, but often, too, in winter, he went with
friends to swim, and he had promised to take her there. He wasn’t the only
one, naturally, who had seen the sea, others we knew had also seen it. Once
Nino Sarratore and his sister Marisa had talked about it, in the tone of those
who found it normal to go every so often to eat taralli and seafood. Gigliola
Spagnuolo had also been there. She, Nino, and Marisa had, lucky for them,
parents  who  took  their  children  on  outings  far  away,  not  just  around  the
corner to the public gardens in front of the parish church. Ours weren’t like
that,  they  didn’t  have  time,  they  didn’t  have  money,  they  didn’t  have  the
desire. It was true that I seemed to have a vague bluish memory of the sea, my
mother claimed she had taken me as a small child, when she had to have sand
treatments for her injured leg. But I didn’t much believe my mother, and to
Lila,  who  didn’t  know  anything  about  it,  I  admitted  that  I  didn’t  know
anything, either. So she planned to do as Rino had, to set off on the road and
get there by herself. She persuaded me to go with her. Tomorrow.
I got up early, I did everything as if I were going to school—my bread and
milk, my schoolbag, my smock. I waited for Lila as usual in front of the gate,
only instead of going to the right we crossed the stradone and turned left,
toward the tunnel.
It was early morning and already hot. There was a strong odor of earth and
grass drying in the sun. We climbed among tall shrubs, on indistinct paths that
led toward the tracks. When we reached an electrical pylon we took off our
smocks and put them in the schoolbags, which we hid in the bushes. Then we
raced through the scrubland, which we knew well, and flew excitedly down the
slope that led to the tunnel. The entrance on the right was very dark: we had
never been inside that obscurity. We held each other by the hand and entered.
It was a long passage, and the luminous circle of the exit seemed far away.
Once we got accustomed to the shadowy light, we saw lines of silvery water
that slid along the walls, large puddles. Apprehensively, dazed by the echo of
our steps, we kept going. Then Lila let out a shout and laughed at the violent
explosion of sound. Immediately I shouted and laughed in turn. From that
moment all we did was shout, together and separately: laughter and cries, cries
and  laughter,  for  the  pleasure  of  hearing  them  amplified.  The  tension
diminished, the journey began.
Ahead of us were many hours when no one in our families would look for us.
When I think of the pleasure of being free, I think of the start of that day, of
coming out of the tunnel and finding ourselves on a road that went straight as
far as the eye could see, the road that, according to what Rino had told Lila, if
you got to the end arrived at the sea. I felt joyfully open to the unknown. It was
entirely different from going down into the cellar or up to Don Achille’s house.
There was a hazy sun, a strong smell of burning. We walked for a long time
between crumbling walls invaded by weeds, low structures from which came
voices in dialect, sometimes a clamor. We saw a horse make its way slowly
down  an  embankment  and  cross  the  street,  whinnying.  We  saw  a  young
woman looking out from a balcony, combing her hair with a flea comb. We saw
a  lot  of  small  snotty  children  who  stopped  playing  and  looked  at  us
threateningly. We also saw a fat man in an undershirt who emerged from a
tumbledown house, opened his pants, and showed us his penis. But we weren’t
scared of anything: Don Nicola, Enzo’s father, sometimes let us pat his horse,
the children were threatening in our courtyard, too, and there was old Don
Mimì who showed us his disgusting thing when we were coming home from
school. For at least three hours, the road we were walking on did not seem
different from the segment that we looked out on every day. And I felt no
responsibility for the right road. We held each other by the hand, we walked
side by side, but for me, as usual, it was as if Lila were ten steps ahead and
knew  precisely  what  to  do,  where  to  go.  I  was  used  to  feeling  second  in
everything,  and  so  I  was  sure  that  to  her,  who  had  always  been  first,
everything was clear: the pace, the calculation of the time available for going
and coming back, the route that would take us to the sea. I felt as if she had
everything in her head ordered in such a way that the world around us would
never be able to create disorder. I abandoned myself happily. I remember a soft
light that seemed to come not from the sky but from the depths of the earth,
even though, on the surface, it was poor, and ugly.
Then we began to get tired, to get thirsty and hungry. We hadn’t thought of
that. Lila slowed down, I slowed down, too. Two or three times I caught her
looking at me, as if she had done something mean to me and was sorry. What
was happening? I realized that she kept turning around and I started turning
around, too. Her hand began to sweat. The tunnel, which was the boundary of
the neighborhood, had been out of sight for a long time. By now the road we
had  just  traveled  was  unfamiliar  to  us,  like  the  one  that  stretched  ahead.
People appeared completely indifferent to our fate. Around us was a landscape
of ruin: dented tanks, burned wood, wrecks of cars, cartwheels with broken
spokes, damaged furniture, rusting scrap iron. Why was Lila looking back? Why
had she stopped talking? What was wrong?
I looked more carefully. The sky, which at first had been very high, was as if
lowered. Behind us everything was becoming black, large heavy clouds lay
over the trees, the light poles. In front of us, the light was still dazzling, but as
if pressed on the sides by a purplish grayness that would suffocate it. In the
distance thunder could be heard. I was afraid, but what frightened me more
was Lila’s expression, new to me. Her mouth was open, her eyes wide, she was
looking nervously ahead, back, to the side, and she was squeezing my hand
hard. Is it possible, I wondered, that she’s afraid? What was happening to her?
The first fat drops arrived, leaving small brown stains as they hit the dusty
road.
“Let’s go back,” Lila said.
“And the sea?”
“It’s too far.”
“And home?”
“Also.”
“Then let’s go to the sea.”
“No.”
“Why?”
I had never seen her so agitated. There was something—something she had
on  the  tip  of  her  tongue  but  couldn’t  make  up  her  mind  to  tell  me—that
suddenly impelled her to drag me home in a hurry. I didn’t understand: why
didn’t we keep going? There was time, the sea couldn’t be too far, and whether
we went back home or continued to go on, we’d get wet just the same, if it
rained. It was a type of reasoning I had learned from her and I was bewildered
when she didn’t apply it.
A violet light cracked the black sky, the thunder was louder. Lila gave me a
tug, I found myself running, unwillingly, back toward our own neighborhood.
The  wind  rose,  the  drops  fell  more  thickly,  in  a  few  seconds  they  were
transformed  into  a  cascade  of  water.  It  occurred  to  neither  of  us  to  seek
shelter. We ran blinded by the rain, our clothes soaked, our bare feet in worn
sandals that had no purchase on the now muddy ground. We ran until we were
out of breath.
We  couldn’t  keep  it  up,  we  slowed  down.  Lightning,  thunder,  a  lava  of
rainwater ran along the sides of the road; noisy trucks sped by, raising waves
of mud. We walked quickly, our hearts in a tumult, first in a heavy downpour,
then in a fine rain, finally under a gray sky. We were soaked, our hair pasted to
our heads, our lips livid, eyes frightened. We went back through the tunnel, we
crossed the scrubland. The bushes dripping with rain grazed us, making us
shiver. We found our schoolbags, we put over our wet clothes the dry smocks,
we set out toward home. Tense, her eyes lowered, Lila had let go of my hand.
We quickly understood that things had not happened as we expected. The
sky had turned black over the neighborhood just when school was over. My
mother had gone to school with an umbrella to take me to the party at the
teacher’s. She had discovered that I wasn’t there, that there was no party. For
hours she had been looking for me. When I saw from a distance her painfully
limping figure I immediately left Lila, so that she wouldn’t get angry with her,
and ran toward my mother. She slapped me and hit me with the umbrella,
yelling that she would kill me if I did something like that again.
Lila took off. At her house no one had noticed anything.
At night my mother reported everything to my father and compelled him to
beat me. He was irritated; he didn’t want to, and they ended up fighting. First
he hit her, then, angry at himself, he gave me a beating. All night I tried to
understand what had really happened. We were supposed to go to the sea and
we hadn’t gone, I had been punished for nothing. A mysterious inversion of
attitudes had occurred: I, despite the rain, would have continued on the road, I
felt far from everything and everyone, and distance—I discovered for the first
time—extinguished  in  me  every  tie  and  every  worry;  Lila  had  abruptly
repented of her own plan, she had given up the sea, she had wanted to return
to the confines of the neighborhood. I couldn’t figure it out.
The next day I didn’t wait for her at the gate, I went alone to school. We met
in the public gardens. She discovered the bruises on my arms and asked what
had happened. I shrugged, that was how things had turned out.
“All they did was beat you?”
“What should they have done?”
“They’re still sending you to study Latin?”
I looked at her in bewilderment.
Was it possible? She had taken me with her hoping that as a punishment my
parents would not send me to middle school? Or had she brought me back in
such a hurry so that I would avoid that punishment? Or—I wonder today—did
she want at different moments both things?
17.
We took the final test in elementary school together. When she realized that
I  was  also  taking  the  admission  test  for  middle  school,  she  lost  energy.
Something happened that surprised everyone: I passed both tests with all tens,
the highest marks; Lila got her diploma with nines and an eight in arithmetic.
She never said a word to me of anger or discontent. She began instead to go
around with Carmela Peluso, the daughter of the carpenter-gambler, as if I
were  no  longer  enough.  Within  a  few  days  we  became  a  trio,  in  which,
however, I, who had been first in school, was almost always the third. They
talked  and  joked  continuously  with  each  other,  or,  rather,  Lila  talked  and
joked, Carmela listened and was amused. When we went for a walk between
the church and the stradone, Lila was always in the middle and the two of us on
the sides. If I noticed that she tended to be closer to Carmela I suffered and
wanted to go home.
In this phase she seemed dazed, like the victim of sunstroke. It was very hot
and we often bathed our heads in the fountain. I remember her with her hair
and face dripping as she talked constantly about going to school the next year.
It had become her favorite subject and she tackled it as if it were one of the
stories she intended to write in order to become rich. Now when she talked she
preferred to address Carmela Peluso, who had got her diploma with all sevens
and had not taken the admission test for middle school, either.
Lila  was  very  skillful  at  telling  stories—they  all  seemed  true—about  the
school where we were going, and the teachers, and she made me laugh, she
made me worry. One morning, though, I interrupted her.
“Lila,” I said, “you can’t go to middle school, you didn’t take the admission
test. Not you and not Carmela.”
She got angry. She said she would go just the same, test or no test.
“And Carmela?”
“Yes.”
“It’s impossible.”
“You’ll see.”
But I must have rattled her. She stopped telling stories about our scholastic
future  and  became  silent.  Then,  with  a  sudden  determination,  she  started
tormenting her family, insisting that she wanted to study Latin, like Gigliola
Spagnuolo and me. She was especially hard on Rino, who had promised to help
her but hadn’t. It was pointless to explain to her that there was now nothing to
do about it; she became even more unreasonable and mean.
At the start of the summer I began to have a feeling difficult to put into
words. I saw that she was agitated, aggressive as she had always been, and I
was pleased, I recognized her. But I also felt, behind her old habits, a pain that
bothered me. She was suffering, and I didn’t like her sorrow. I preferred her
when  she  was  different  from  me,  distant  from  my  anxieties.  And  the
uneasiness that the discovery of her fragility brought me was transformed by
secret pathways into a need of my own to be superior. As soon as I could,
cautiously,  especially  when  Carmela  Peluso  wasn’t  there,  I  found  a  way  to
remind  her  that  I  had  gotten  a  better  report  card.  As  soon  as  I  could,
cautiously, I pointed out to her that I would go to middle school and she would
not. To not be second, to outdo her, for the first time seemed to me a success.
She must have realized it and she became even harsher, but toward her family,
not me.
Often,  as  I  waited  for  her  to  come  down  to  the  courtyard,  I  heard  her
shouting from the windows. She hurled insults in the worst street dialect, so
vulgar that listening to them made me think of order and respect; it didn’t
seem right to treat adults like that, or even her brother. Of course, her father,
Fernando the shoemaker, when he lost his head turned ugly. But all fathers
had  fits  of  anger.  And  hers,  when  she  didn’t  provoke  him,  was  a  kind,
sympathetic man, a hard worker. He looked like an actor named Randolph
Scott, but unrefined. He was rough, without pale colors, a black beard covered
his cheeks, and he had broad, stubby hands streaked with dirt in every crease
and under the nails. He joked easily. When I went to Lila’s house he took my
nose between index and middle fingers and pretended to pull it off. He wanted
to make me believe that he had stolen it and that now, as his prisoner, the nose
was struggling to escape and return to my face. I found this funny. But if Rino
or Lila or the other children made him angry, even I, hearing him from the
street, was afraid.
I don’t know what happened, one afternoon. In the hot weather we stayed
outside until dinnertime. That day Lila didn’t show up, and I went to call her at
the windows, which were on the ground floor. I cried, “Lì, Lì, Lì,” and my voice
joined  Fernando’s  extremely  loud  voice,  his  wife’s  loud  voice,  my  friend’s
insistent voice. I could hear that something was going on and it terrified me.
From the windows came a vulgar Neapolitan and the crash of broken objects.
In appearance it was no different from what happened at my house when my
mother  got  angry  because  there  wasn’t  enough  money  and  my  father  got
angry because she had already spent the part of his wages he had given her. In
reality the difference was substantial. My father was restrained even when he
was angry, he became violent quietly, keeping his voice from exploding even if
the veins on his neck swelled and his eyes were inflamed. Fernando instead
yelled, threw things; his rage fed on itself, and he couldn’t stop. In fact his
wife’s attempts to stop him increased his fury, and even if he wasn’t mad at her
he ended up beating her. I insisted, then, in calling Lila, just to get her out of
that tempest of cries, obscenities, sounds of destruction. I cried, “Lì, Lì, Lì,” but
she—I heard her—kept on insulting her father.
We were ten, soon we would be eleven. I was filling out, Lila remained small
and thin, she was light and delicate. Suddenly the shouting stopped and a few
seconds later my friend flew out the window, passed over my head, and landed
on the asphalt behind me.
I was stunned. Fernando looked out, still screaming horrible threats at his
daughter. He had thrown her like a thing.
I looked at her terrified while she tried to get up and said, with an almost
amused grimace, “I haven’t hurt myself.”
But she was bleeding; she had broken her arm.
18.
Fathers  could  do  that  and  other  things  to  impudent  girls.  Afterward,
Fernando became sullen, and worked more than usual. That summer, Carmela
and Lila and I often passed the workshop, but while Rino always gave us a
friendly nod of greeting, the shoemaker wouldn’t even look at his daughter as
long as her arm was in the cast. It was clear that he was sorry. His violent
moments  as  a  father  were  a  small  thing  compared  with  the  widespread
violence of the neighborhood. At the Bar Solara, in the heat, between gambling
losses  and  troublesome  drunkenness,  people  often  reached  the  point  of
disperazione—a word that in dialect meant having lost all hope but also being
broke—and  hence  of  fights.  Silvio  Solara,  the  owner,  a  large  man,  with  an
imposing belly, blue eyes, and a high forehead, had a dark stick behind the bar
with which he didn’t hesitate to strike anyone who didn’t pay for his drinks,
who had asked for a loan and didn’t repay it within the time limit, who made
any sort of agreement and didn’t keep it, and often he was helped by his sons,
Marcello and Michele, boys the age of Lila’s brother, who hit harder than their
father.  Blows  were  given  and  received.  Men  returned  home  embittered  by
their losses, by alcohol, by debts, by deadlines, by beatings, and at the first
inopportune word they beat their families, a chain of wrongs that generated
wrongs.
Right  in  the  middle  of  that  long  season  an  event  took  place  that  upset
everyone, but on Lila had a very particular effect. Don Achille, the terrible Don
Achille, was murdered in his house in the early afternoon of a surprisingly
rainy August day.
He was in the kitchen, and had just opened the window to let in the rain-
freshened air. He had got up from bed to do so, interrupting his nap. He had on
worn blue pajamas, and on his feet only socks of a yellowish color, blackened at
the heels. As soon as he opened the window a gust of rain struck his face and
someone plunged a knife into the right side of his neck, halfway between the
jaw and the clavicle.
The blood spurted from his neck and hit a copper pot hanging on the wall.
The copper was so shiny that the blood looked like an ink stain from which—
Lila told us—dripped a wavering black line. The murderer—though she inclined
to a murderess—had entered without breaking in, at a time when the children
were outside and the adults, if they weren’t at work, were lying down. Surely
he had entered with a skeleton key. Surely he had intended to strike him in the
heart while he was sleeping, but had found him awake and thrust that knife
into his throat. Don Achille had turned, with the blade stuck in his neck, eyes
staring and the blood pouring out and dripping all over his pajamas. He had
fallen to his knees and then, facedown, to the floor.
The murder had made such an impression on Lila that almost every day,
with great seriousness, always adding some new details, she compelled us to
hear the story as if she had been present. Both Carmela Peluso and I, listening
to  her,  were  frightened;  Carmela  couldn’t  sleep  at  night.  At  the  worst
moments, when the black line of blood dripped along the copper pot, Lila’s
eyes became two fierce cracks. Surely she imagined that the murderer was
female only because it was easier for her to identify with her.
In that period we often went to the Pelusos’ house to play checkers and
three-of-a-kind, for which Lila had developed a passion. Carmela’s mother let
us  sit  in  the  dining  room,  where  all  the  furniture  had  been  made  by  her
husband before Don Achille took away his carpenter’s tools and his shop. We
sat at the table, which was placed between two sideboards with mirrors, and
played. I found Carmela increasingly disagreeable, but I pretended to be her
friend at least as much as I was Lila’s, in fact sometimes I even let her think
that I liked her better. On the other hand I really did like Signora Peluso. She
had  worked  at  the  tobacco  factory,  but  had  recently  lost  her  job  and  was
always  at  home.  Anyway,  she  was,  for  better  or  for  worse,  a  cheerful,  fat
woman, with a large bosom and bright red cheeks, and although money was
scarce she always had something good to offer us. Also her husband seemed
more tranquil. Now he was a waiter in a pizzeria, and he tried not to go to the
Bar Solara to lose at cards the little he earned.
One morning we were in the dining room playing checkers, Carmela and I
against Lila. We were sitting at the table, us two on one side, she on the other.
Behind  Lila  and  behind  Carmela  and  me  were  the  identical,  dark  wood
sideboards  with  the  mirrors  in  spiral  frames.  I  looked  at  the  three  of  us
reflected to infinity and I couldn’t concentrate, both because of those images,
which disturbed me, and because of the shouts of Alfredo Peluso, who that day
was upset and was quarreling with his wife, Giuseppina.
There  was  a  knock  at  the  door  and  Signora  Peluso  went  to  open  it.
Exclamations,  cries.  We  looked  out  into  the  hall  and  saw  the  carabinieri,
figures  we  feared  greatly.  The  carabinieri  seized  Alfredo  and  dragged  him
away. He struggled, shouted, called his children by name, Pasquale, Carmela,
Ciro,  Immacolata,  he  grabbed  the  furniture  made  with  his  own  hands,  the
chairs, Giuseppina, he swore that he hadn’t murdered Don Achille, that he was
innocent. Carmela wept desperately, they all wept, I, too, began to weep. But
not Lila, Lila had that look she had had years earlier for Melina, but with some
difference: now, although she remained still, she appeared to be moving with
Alfredo Peluso, whose cries were hoarse, and frightening: Aaaah.
It was the most terrible thing we witnessed in the course of our childhood,
and made a deep impression on me. Lila attended to Carmela, and consoled
her. She said to her that, if it really was her father, he had done well to kill Don
Achille, but that in her opinion it wasn’t him: surely he was innocent and
would soon get out of prison. They whispered together continuously and if I
approached they moved a little farther off so that I wouldn’t hear.
A
DOLESCENCE
The Story of the Shoes
1.
On December 31st of 1958 Lila had her first episode of dissolving margins.
The term isn’t mine, she always used it. She said that on those occasions the
outlines of people and things suddenly dissolved, disappeared. That night, on
the  terrace  where  we  were  celebrating  the  arrival  of  1959,  when  she  was
abruptly struck by that sensation, she was frightened and kept it to herself,
still unable to name it. It was only years later, one night in November 1980—we
were thirty-six, were married, had children—that she recounted in detail what
had happened to her then, what still sometimes happened to her, and she used
that term for the first time.
We were outside, on the roof terrace of one of the apartment buildings in
the neighborhood. Although it was very cold we were wearing light, low-cut
dresses, so that we would appear attractive. We looked at the boys, who were
cheerful,  aggressive,  dark  figures  carried  away  by  the  party,  the  food,  the
sparkling wine. They were setting off fireworks to celebrate the new year, a
ritual in which, as I will explain later, Lila had had a large role, so that now she
felt content, watching the streaks of fire in the sky. But suddenly—she told me
—in spite of the cold she had begun to sweat. It seemed to her that everyone
was  shouting  too  loudly  and  moving  too  quickly.  This  sensation  was
accompanied  by  nausea,  and  she  had  had  the  impression  that  something
absolutely material, which had been present around her and around everyone
and everything forever, but imperceptible, was breaking down the outlines of
persons and things and revealing itself.
Her heart had started beating uncontrollably. She had begun to feel horror
at the cries emerging from the throats of all those who were moving about on
the terrace amid the smoke, amid the explosions, as if the sound obeyed new,
unknown laws. Her nausea increased, the dialect had become unfamiliar, the
way our wet throats bathed the words in the liquid of saliva was intolerable. A
sense  of  repulsion  had  invested  all  the  bodies  in  movement,  their  bone
structure,  the  frenzy  that  shook  them.  How  poorly  made  we  are,  she  had
thought, how insufficient. The broad shoulders, the arms, the legs, the ears,
noses, eyes seemed to her attributes of monstrous beings who had fallen from
some  corner  of  the  black  sky.  And  the  disgust,  who  knows  why,  was
concentrated in particular on her brother Rino, the person who was closest to
her, the person she loved most.
She seemed to see him for the first time as he really was: a squat animal
form, thickset, the loudest, the fiercest, the greediest, the meanest. The tumult
of her heart had overwhelmed her, she felt as if she were suffocating. Too
smoky, too foul-smelling, too much flashing fire in the cold. Lila had tried to
calm herself, she had said to herself: I have to seize the stream that’s passing
through me, I have to throw it out from me. But at that point she had heard,
among the shouts of joy, a kind of final detonation and something like the
breath of a wing beat had passed by her. Someone was shooting not rockets
and  firecrackers  but  a  gun.  Her  brother  Rino  was  shouting  unbearable
obscenities in the direction of the yellow flashes.
On the occasion when she told me that story, Lila also said that the sensation
she called dissolving margins, although it had come on her distinctly only that
once,  wasn’t  completely  new  to  her.  For  example,  she  had  often  had  the
sensation of moving for a few fractions of a second into a person or a thing or a
number or a syllable, violating its edges. And the day her father threw her out
the  window  she  had  felt  absolutely  certain,  as  she  was  flying  toward  the
asphalt,  that  small,  very  friendly  reddish  animals  were  dissolving  the
composition of the street, transforming it into a smooth, soft material. But that
New Year’s Eve she had perceived for the first time unknown entities that
broke down the outline of the world and demonstrated its terrifying nature.
This had deeply shaken her.
2.
When Lila’s cast was removed and her arm reappeared, pale but perfectly
functioning, her father, Fernando, came to an agreement with himself and,
without saying so directly, but through Rino and his wife, Nunzia, allowed her
to go to a school to learn I don’t know exactly what, stenography, bookkeeping,
home economics, or all three.
She went unwillingly. Nunzia was summoned by the teachers because her
daughter was often absent without an excuse, disrupted the class, if questioned
refused to answer, if she had to do exercises did them in five minutes and then
harassed her classmates. At some point she got a nasty flu, she who never got
sick, and seemed to welcome it with a sort of abandon, so that the virus quickly
sapped her energy. Days passed and she didn’t get better. As soon as she tried
to go out again, paler than usual, the fever returned. One day I saw her on the
street and she looked like a spirit, the spirit of a child who had eaten poisonous
berries, such as I had seen illustrated in a book belonging to Maestra Oliviero.
Later a rumor spread that she would soon die, which caused me an unbearable
anxiety. She recovered, almost in spite of herself. But, with the excuse that her
health was poor, she went to school less and less often, and at the end of the
year she failed.
Nor did I do well in my first year of middle school. At first I had great
expectations, and even if I didn’t say so clearly to myself I was glad to be there
with  Gigliola  Spagnuolo  rather  than  with  Lila.  In  some  very  secret  part  of
myself I looked forward to a school where she would never enter, where, in her
absence, I would be the best student, and which I would sometimes tell her
about, boasting. But immediately I began to falter, many of the others proved
to be better than me. I ended up with Gigliola in a kind of swamp, we were
little animals frightened of our own mediocrity, and we struggled all year not
to end up at the bottom of the class. I was extremely disappointed. The idea
began to quietly form that without Lila I would never feel the pleasure of
belonging to that exclusive group of the best.
Every so often, at the entrance to school, I ran into Alfonso, the young son of
Don Achille, but we pretended not to know each other. I didn’t know what to
say to him, I thought that Alfredo Peluso had done a good thing in murdering
his father, and words of consolation did not come to me. I couldn’t even feel
moved  by  the  fact  that  he  had  been  orphaned,  it  was  as  if  he  bore  some
responsibility for the fear that for years Don Achille had inspired in me. He had
a black band sewn on his jacket, he never laughed, he was always on his own.
He was in a different class from mine, and the rumor was that he was really
smart. At the end of the year we found out that he had been promoted with an
average of eight, which depressed me hugely. Gigliola had to repeat Latin and
mathematics, I managed to pass with sixes.
When the grades came out, the teacher summoned my mother, told her in
my presence that I had passed Latin only thanks to her generosity, and that
without private lessons the next year I certainly wouldn’t make it. I felt a
double humiliation: I was ashamed because I hadn’t done as well as I had in
elementary  school,  and  I  was  ashamed  of  the  difference  between  the
harmonious, modestly dressed figure of the teacher, between her Italian that
slightly resembled that of the Iliad, and the misshapen figure of my mother,
her old shoes, her dull hair, the dialect bent into an ungrammatical Italian.
My mother, too, must have felt the weight of that humiliation. She went
home in a surly mood, she told my father that the teachers weren’t happy with
me, she needed help in the house and I ought to leave school. They discussed it
at length, they quarreled, and in the end my father decided that, since I at least
had  been  promoted,  while  Gigliola  had  been  held  back  in  two  subjects,  I
deserved to continue.
I spent the summer lethargically, in the courtyard, at the ponds, generally
with Gigliola, who often talked about the young university student who came
to her house to give her private lessons and who, according to her, was in love
with her. I listened but I was bored. Every so often I saw Lila with Carmela
Peluso; she, too, had gone to a school for something or other, and she, too, had
failed. I felt that Lila no longer wanted to be my friend, and that idea brought
on a weary exhaustion. Sometimes, hoping that my mother wouldn’t see me, I
lay down on the bed and dozed.
One afternoon I really fell asleep and when I woke I felt wet. I went to the
bathroom to see what was wrong and discovered that my underpants were
stained with blood. Terrified by I don’t know what, maybe a scolding from my
mother  for  having  hurt  myself  between  my  legs,  I  washed  the  underpants
carefully, wrung them out, and put them on again wet. Then I went out into
the heat of the courtyard. My heart was pounding.
I met Lila and Carmela, and walked with them to the parish church. I felt
that I was getting wet again, but I tried to calm down by telling myself it was
the wet underpants. When the fear became unbearable I whispered to Lila, “I
have to tell you something.”
“What?”
“I want to tell just you.”
I took her by the arm, trying to drag her away from Carmela, but Carmela
followed us. I was so worried that in the end I confessed to them both, but
addressing only Lila.
“What can it be?” I asked.
Carmela knew all about it. She had had that bleeding for a year already,
every month.
“It’s normal,” she said. “Girls have it naturally: you bleed for a few days, your
stomach and your back hurt, but then it goes away.”
“Really?”
“Really.”
Lila’s silence pushed me toward Carmela. The naturalness with which she
had  said  what  she  knew  reassured  me  and  made  me  like  her.  I  spent  all
afternoon talking to her, until dinner time. You wouldn’t die from that wound,
I learned. Rather, “it means that you’re grown-up and you can make babies, if a
man sticks his thingy in your stomach.”
Lila listened without saying anything, or almost anything. We asked if she
had blood like us and saw her hesitate, then reluctantly answer no. Suddenly
she seemed small, smaller than I had ever seen her. She was three or four
inches shorter, all skin and bones, very pale in spite of the days spent outside.
And she had failed. And she didn’t know what the blood was. And no boy had
ever made a declaration to her.
“You’ll get it,” we both said, in a falsely comforting tone.
“What do I care,” she said. “I don’t have it because I don’t want to, it makes
me sick. And anyone who has it makes me sick.”
She started to leave but then stopped and asked me, “How’s Latin?”
“Wonderful.”
“Are you good at it?”
“Very.”
She thought about it and muttered, “I failed on purpose. I don’t want to go to
any school anymore.”
“What will you do?”
“Whatever I want.”
She left us there in the middle of the courtyard.
For the rest of the summer she didn’t appear. I became very friendly with
Carmela Peluso, who, although she laughed too much and then complained too
much, had absorbed Lila’s influence so potently that she became at times a
kind of surrogate. In speech Carmela imitated her tone of voice, used some of
her recurring expressions, gesticulated in a similar way, and when she walked
tried to move like her, even though physically she was more like me: pretty
and plump, bursting with health. That sort of misappropriation partly repulsed
and partly attracted me. I wavered between irritation at a remake that seemed
a caricature and fascination because, even diluted, Lila’s habits still enchanted
me. It was with those that Carmela finally bound me to her. She told me how
terrible  the  new  school  had  been:  everyone  teased  her  and  the  teachers
couldn’t stand her. She told of going to the prison of Poggioreale with her
mother and siblings to see her father, and how they all wept. She told me that
her father was innocent, that it was a black creature who killed Don Achille,
part male but mostly female, who lived with the rats and came out of the sewer
grates, even in daytime, and did whatever terrible thing had to be done before
escaping underground. She told me unexpectedly, with a fatuous little smile,
that she was in love with Alfonso Carracci. Right afterward her smile turned to
tears: it was a love that tortured her, and sapped her strength, the daughter of
the murderer was in love with the son of the victim. It was enough for her to
see him crossing the courtyard or passing by on the stradone to feel faint.
This was a confidence that made a great impression on me and consolidated
our friendship. Carmela swore that she had never talked about it to anyone,
not even Lila: if she had decided to open up to me it was because she couldn’t
bear to keep it inside anymore. I liked her dramatic tone. We examined all the
possible  consequences  of  that  passion  until  school  started  again  and  I  no
longer had time to listen to her.
What a story! Not even Lila, perhaps, would have been able to make up such
a tale.
3.
A period of unhappiness began. I got fat, and under the skin of my chest two
hard shoots sprouted, hair flourished in my armpits and my pubis, I became
sad and at the same time anxious. In school I worked harder than I ever had,
yet the mathematics problems almost never gave the result expected by the
textbook, the Latin sentences seemed to make no sense. As soon as I could I
locked myself in the bathroom and looked at myself in the mirror, naked. I no
longer knew who I was. I began to suspect that I would keep changing, until
from me my mother would emerge, lame, with a crossed eye, and no one would
love  me  anymore.  I  cried  often,  without  warning.  My  chest,  meanwhile,
became large and soft. I felt at the mercy of obscure forces acting inside my
body, I was always agitated.
One day as I came out of school, Gino, the pharmacist’s son, followed me
along the street and said that his classmates claimed that my breasts weren’t
real, I stuffed them with cotton batting. He laughed as he spoke. He said that he
thought they were real, he had bet twenty lire on it. Finally he said that, if he
won, he would keep ten lire for himself and would give me ten, but I had to
prove that I didn’t use padding.
That request frightened me. Since I didn’t know how to act, I deliberately
resorted to Lila’s bold tone: “Give me the ten lire.”
“Why, am I right?”
“Yes.”
He ran away, and I was disappointed. But soon he returned with a boy from
his class, a skinny boy whose name I don’t remember, with a dark down above
his lip. Gino said to me, “He has to be there, otherwise the others won’t believe
I’ve won.”
Again I resorted to Lila’s tone.
“First the money.”
“And if you have padding?”
“I don’t.”
He gave me ten lire and we all went, silently, to the top floor of a building
near the public gardens. There, next to the iron door that led to the terrace,
where I was clearly outlined by slender segments of light, I lifted up my shirt
and showed them my breasts. The two stood staring as if they couldn’t believe
their eyes. Then they turned and ran down the stairs.
I heaved a sigh of relief and went to the Bar Solara to buy myself an ice
cream.
That episode remained stamped in my memory: I felt for the first time the
magnetic force that my body exercised over men, but above all I realized that
Lila acted not only on Carmela but also on me like a demanding ghost. If I had
had to make a decision in the pure disorder of emotions in a situation like that,
what would I have done? I would have run away. And if I had been with Lila? I
would have pulled her by the arm, I would have whispered, Let’s go, and then,
as usual, I would have stayed, because she, as usual, would have decided to
stay. Instead, in her absence, after a slight hesitation I put myself in her place.
Or, rather, I had made a place for her in me. If I thought again of the moment
when Gino made his request, I felt precisely how I had driven myself away,
how I had mimicked Lila’s look and tone and behavior in situations of brazen
conflict, and I was pleased. But sometimes I wondered, somewhat anxiously:
Am I being like Carmela? I didn’t think so, it seemed to me that I was different,
but I couldn’t explain in what sense and my pleasure was spoiled. When I
passed Fernando’s shop with my ice cream and saw Lila intently arranging
shoes on a long table, I was tempted to stop and tell her everything, hear what
she thought. But she didn’t see me and I kept going.
4.
She was always busy. That year Rino compelled her to enroll in school again,
but again she almost never went and again she failed. Her mother asked her to
help in the house, her father asked her to be in the shop, and she, all of a
sudden, instead of resisting, seemed in fact content to labor for both. The rare
times we saw each other—on Sunday after Mass or walking between the public
gardens  and  the  stradone—she  displayed  no  curiosity  about  my  school,  and
immediately started talking intensely and with admiration about the work that
her father and brother did.
She knew that her father as a boy had wanted to be free, had fled the shop of
her grandfather, who was also a shoemaker, and had gone to work in a shoe
factory in Casoria, where he had made shoes for everyone, even soldiers going
to war. She had discovered that Fernando knew how to make a shoe from
beginning  to  end  by  hand,  but  he  was  also  completely  at  home  with  the
machines  and  knew  how  to  use  them,  the  post  machine,  the  trimmer,  the
sander. She talked to me about leather, uppers, leather-goods dealers, leather
production, high heels and flat heels, about preparing the thread, about soles
and how the sole was applied, colored, and buffed. She used all those words of
the  trade  as  if  they  were  magic  and  her  father  had  learned  them  in  an
enchanted  world—Casoria,  the  factory—from  which  he  had  returned  like  a
satisfied explorer, so satisfied that now he preferred the family shop, the quiet
bench, the hammer, the iron foot, the good smell of glue mixed with that of old
shoes.  And  she  drew  me  inside  that  vocabulary  with  such  an  energetic
enthusiasm that her father and Rino, thanks to their ability to enclose people’s
feet  in  solid,  comfortable  shoes,  seemed  to  me  the  best  people  in  the
neighborhood. Above all, I came home with the impression that, not spending
my days in a shoemaker’s shop, having for a father a banal porter instead, I was
excluded from a rare privilege.
I began to feel that my presence in class was pointless. For months and
months it seemed to me that every promise had fled from the textbooks, all
energy. Coming out of school, dazed by unhappiness, I passed Fernando’s shop
only to see Lila at her workplace, sitting at a little table in the back, her thin
chest with no hint of a bosom, her scrawny neck, her small face. I don’t know
what she did, exactly, but she was there, active, beyond the glass door, set
between the bent head of her father and the bent head of her brother, no
books, no lessons, no homework. Sometimes I stopped to look at the boxes of
polish in the window, the old shoes newly resoled, new ones put on a form that
expanded the leather and widened them, making them more comfortable, as if
I were a customer and had an interest in the merchandise. I went away only,
and reluctantly, when she saw me and waved to me, and I answered her wave,
and  she  returned  to  concentrate  on  her  work.  But  often  it  was  Rino  who
noticed me first and made funny faces to make me laugh. Embarrassed, I ran
away without waiting for Lila to see me.
One Sunday I was surprised to find myself talking passionately about shoes
with Carmela Peluso. She would buy the magazine Sogno and devour the photo
novels. At first it seemed to me a waste of time, then I began to look, too, and
we started to read them together, and comment on the stories and what the
characters said, which was written in white letters on a black background.
Carmela tended to pass without a break from comments on the fictional love
stories to comments on the true story of her love for Alfonso. In order not to
seem inferior, I once told her about the pharmacist’s son, Gino, claiming that
he loved me. She didn’t believe it. The pharmacist’s son was in her eyes a kind
of unattainable prince, future heir of the pharmacy, a gentleman who would
never marry the daughter of a porter, and I was on the point of telling her
about the time he had asked to see my breasts and I had let him and earned ten
lire. But we were holding Sogno spread out on our knees and my gaze fell on the
beautiful  high-heeled  shoes  of  one  of  the  actresses.  This  seemed  to  me  a
momentous subject, more than the story of my breasts, and I couldn’t resist, I
began  to  praise  them  and  whoever  had  made  such  beautiful  shoes,  and  to
fantasize that if we wore shoes like that neither Gino nor Alfonso would be able
to  resist  us.  The  more  I  talked,  though,  the  more  I  realized,  to  my
embarrassment, that I was trying to make Lila’s new passion my own. Carmela
listened to me distractedly, then said she had to go. In shoes and shoemakers
she had little or no interest. Although she imitated Lila’s habits, she, unlike me,
held on to the only things that really absorbed her: the photo novels, love
stories.
5.
This entire period had a similar character. I soon had to admit that what I
did by myself couldn’t excite me, only what Lila touched became important. If
she withdrew, if her voice withdrew from things, the things got dirty, dusty.
Middle school, Latin, the teachers, the books, the language of books seemed
less evocative than the finish of a pair of shoes, and that depressed me.
But one Sunday everything changed again. We had gone, Carmela, Lila, and I,
to catechism, we were preparing for our first communion. On the way out Lila
said she had something to do and she left us. But I saw that she wasn’t heading
toward  home:  to  my  great  surprise  she  went  into  the  elementary  school
building.
I walked with Carmela, but when I got bored I said goodbye, walked around
the building, and went back. The school was closed on Sunday, how could Lila
go  into  the  building?  After  much  hesitation  I  ventured  beyond  the
entranceway, into the hall. I had never gone into my old school and I felt a
strong emotion, I recognized the smell, which brought with it a sensation of
comfort, a sense of myself that I no longer had. I went into the only door open
on the ground floor. There was a large neon-lit room, whose walls were lined
with shelves of old books. I counted a dozen adults, a lot of children. They
would take down volumes, page through them, put them back, and choose one.
Then they got in line in front of a desk behind which sat an old enemy of
Maestra Oliviero’s, lean Maestro Ferraro, with his crew-cut gray hair. Ferraro
examined  the  chosen  text,  marked  something  in  the  record  book,  and  the
person went out with one or more books.
I looked around: Lila wasn’t there, maybe she had already left. What was she
doing, she didn’t go to school anymore, she loved shoes and old shoes, and yet,
without saying anything to me, she came to this place to get books? Did she
like this space? Why didn’t she ask me to come with her? Why had she left me
with Carmela? Why did she talk to me about how soles were ground and not
about what she read?
I was angry, and ran away.
For a while school seemed to me more meaningless than ever. Then I was
sucked back in  by the press of homework and  end-of-the-year tests, I was
afraid  of  getting  bad  grades,  I  studied  a  lot  but  aimlessly.  And  other
preoccupations weighed on me. My mother said that I was indecent with those
big breasts I had developed, and she took me to buy a bra. She was more abrupt
than usual. She seemed ashamed that I had a bosom, that I got my period. The
crude instructions she gave me were rapid and insufficient, barely muttered. I
didn’t have time to ask her any questions before she turned her back and
walked away with her lopsided gait.
The bra made my chest even more noticeable. In the last months of school I
was  besieged  by  boys  and  I  quickly  realized  why.  Gino  and  his  friend  had
spread the rumor that I would show how I was made easily, and every so often
someone would ask me to repeat the spectacle. I sneaked away, I compressed
my bosom by holding my arms crossed over it, I felt mysteriously guilty and
alone  with  my  guilt.  The  boys  persisted,  even  on  the  street,  even  in  the
courtyard. They laughed, they made fun of me. I tried to keep them off once or
twice by acting like Lila, but it didn’t work for me, and then I couldn’t stand it
and burst into tears. Out of fear that they would bother me I stayed in the
house. I studied hard, I went out now only to go, very reluctantly, to school.
One morning in May Gino ran after me and asked me, not arrogantly but,
rather,  with  some  emotion,  if  I  would  be  his  girlfriend.  I  said  no,  out  of
resentment, revenge, embarrassment, yet proud that the son of the pharmacist
wanted me. The next day he asked me again and he didn’t stop asking until
June, when, with some delay due to the complicated lives of our parents, we
made our first communion, the girls in white dresses, like brides.
In those dresses, we lingered in the church square and immediately sinned
by talking about love. Carmela couldn’t believe that I had refused the son of
the pharmacist, and she told Lila. She, surprisingly, instead of slipping away
with the air of someone saying Who cares, was interested. We all talked about
it.
“Why do you say no?” Lila asked me in dialect.
I answered unexpectedly in proper Italian, to make an impression, to let her
understand that, even if I spent my time talking about boyfriends, I wasn’t to
be treated like Carmela.
“Because I’m not sure of my feelings.”
It was a phrase I had learned from reading Sogno and Lila seemed struck by
it. As if it were one of those contests in elementary school, we began to speak
in  the  language  of  comics  and  books,  which  reduced  Carmela  to  pure  and
simple listener. Those moments lighted my heart and my head: she and I and
all those well-crafted words. In middle school nothing like that ever happened,
not  with  classmates  or  with  teachers;  it  was  wonderful.  Step  by  step  Lila
convinced me that one achieves security in love only by subjecting the wooer
to hard tests. And so, returning suddenly to dialect, she advised me to become
Gino’s girlfriend but on the condition that all summer he agree to buy ice
cream for me, her, and Carmela.
“If he doesn’t agree it means it’s not true love.”
I did as she told me and Gino vanished. It wasn’t true love, then, and so I
didn’t  suffer  from  it.  The  exchange  with  Lila  had  given  me  a  pleasure  so
intense that I planned to devote myself to her totally, especially in summer,
when I would have more free time. Meanwhile I wanted that conversation to
become  the  model  for  all  our  next  encounters.  I  felt  clever  again,  as  if
something had hit me in the head, bringing to the surface images and words.
But  the  sequel  of  that  episode  was  not  what  I  expected.  Instead  of
consolidating and making exclusive the relationship between her and me, it
attracted a lot of other girls. The conversation, the advice she had given me, its
effect had so struck Carmela Peluso that she ended up telling everyone. The
result was that the daughter of the shoemaker, who had no bosom and didn’t
get her period and didn’t even have a boyfriend, became in a few days the most
reliable dispenser of advice on affairs of the heart. And she, again surprising
me, accepted that role. If she wasn’t busy in the house or the shop, I saw her
talking now with this girl, now with that. I passed by, I greeted her, but she was
so absorbed that she didn’t hear me. I always caught phrases that seemed to
me beautiful, and they made me suffer.
6.
These were desolate days, at the height of which came a humiliation that I
should have predicted and which instead I had pretended not to care about:
Alfonso Carracci was promoted with an average of eight, Gigliola Spagnuolo
was promoted with an average of seven, and I had all sixes and four in Latin. I
would have to take the exam again in September in that one subject.
This time it was my father who said it was pointless for me to continue. The
schoolbooks had already cost a lot. The Latin dictionary, the Campanini and
Carboni, even though it was bought used, had been a big expense. There was
no money to send me to private lessons during the summer. But above all it
was now clear that I wasn’t clever: the young son of Don Achille had passed
and I hadn’t, the daughter of Spagnuolo the pastry maker had passed and I
hadn’t: one had to be resigned.
I wept night and day, I made myself ugly on purpose to punish myself. I was
the oldest, after me there were two boys and another girl, Elisa: Peppe and
Gianni, the two boys, came in turn to console me, now bringing me some fruit,
now asking me to play with them. But I felt alone just the same, with a cruel
fate, and I couldn’t calm down. Then one afternoon I heard my mother come
up behind me. She said in dialect, in her usual harsh tone: “We can’t pay for
the lessons, but you can try to study by yourself and see if you pass the exam.”
I looked at her uncertainly. She was the same: lusterless hair, wandering eye,
large nose, heavy body. She added, “Nowhere is it written that you can’t do it.”
That was all she said, or at least it’s what I remember. Starting the next day, I
began  to  study,  forcing  myself  never  to  go  to  the  courtyard  or  the  public
gardens.
But one morning I heard someone calling me from the street. It was Lila,
who since we finished elementary school had completely gotten out of the
habit.
“Lenù,” she called.
I looked out.
“I have to tell you something.”
“What?”
“Come down.”
I went down reluctantly, it irritated me to admit to her that I had to take the
exam again. We wandered a bit in the courtyard, in the sun. I asked unwillingly
what  was  new  on  the  subject  of  boyfriends.  I  remember  that  I  asked  her
explicitly if there had been developments between Carmela and Alfonso.
“What sort of developments?”
“She loves him.”
She narrowed her eyes. When she did that, turning serious, without a smile,
as if leaving the pupils only a crack allowed her to see in a more concentrated
way, she reminded me of birds of prey I had seen in films at the parish cinema.
But that day it seemed to me she had perceived something that made her
angry and at the same time frightened her.
“She didn’t tell you anything about her father?” she asked.
“That he’s innocent.”
“And who is the murderer?”
“A creature half male and half female who hides in the sewers and comes out
of the grates like the rats.”
“So it’s true,” she said, as if suddenly in pain, and she added that Carmela
believed  everything  she  said,  that  all  the  girls  did.  “I  don’t  want  to  talk
anymore, I don’t want to talk to anyone,” she muttered, scowling, and I felt
that  she  wasn’t  speaking  with  contempt,  that  the  influence  she  had  on  us
didn’t please her, so that for a moment I didn’t understand: in her place I
would have been extremely proud. In her, though, there was no pride but a
kind of impatience mixed with the fear of responsibility.
“But it’s good to talk to other people,” I murmured.
“Yes, but only if when you talk there’s someone who answers.”
I  felt  a  burst  of  joy  in  my  heart.  What  request  was  there  in  that  fine
sentence? Was she saying that she wanted to talk only to me because I didn’t
accept everything that came out of her mouth but responded to it? Was she
saying that only I knew how to follow the things that went through her mind?
Yes. And she was saying it in a tone that I didn’t recognize, that was feeble,
although brusque as usual. She had suggested to Carmela, she told me, that in a
novel or a film the daughter of the murderer would fall in love with the son of
the victim. It was a possibility: to become a true fact a true love would have to
arise. But Carmela hadn’t understood and right away, the next day, had gone
around telling everyone that she was in love with Alfonso: a lie just to show off,
whose consequences were unknown. We discussed it. We were twelve years
old, but we walked along the hot streets of the neighborhood, amid the dust
and flies that the occasional old trucks stirred up as they passed, like two old
ladies taking the measure of lives of disappointment, clinging tightly to each
other.  No  one  understood  us,  only  we  two—I  thought—understood  one
another. We together, we alone, knew how the pall that had weighed on the
neighborhood forever, that is, ever since we could remember, might lift at
least a little if Peluso, the former carpenter, had not plunged the knife into Don
Achille’s neck, if it was an inhabitant of the sewers who had done it, if the
daughter of the murderer married the son of the victim. There was something
unbearable in the things, in the people, in the buildings, in the streets that,
only if you reinvented it all, as in a game, became acceptable. The essential,
however, was to know how to play, and she and I, only she and I, knew how to
do it.
She asked me at one point, without an obvious connection but as if all our
conversation could arrive only at that question: “Are we still friends?”
“Yes.”
“Then will you do me a favor?”
I would have done anything for her, on that morning of reconciliation: run
away from home, leave the neighborhood, sleep in farmhouses, feed on roots,
descend into the sewers through the grates, never turn back, not even if it was
cold, not even if it rained. But what she asked seemed to me nothing and at the
moment disappointed me. She wanted simply to meet once a day, in the public
gardens, even just for an hour, before dinner, and I was to bring the Latin
books.
“I won’t bother you,” she said.
She knew already that I had to take the exam again and wanted to study
with me.
7.
In those middle school years many things changed right before our eyes, but
day by day, so that they didn’t seem to be real changes.
The Bar Solara expanded, became a well-stocked pastry shop—whose skilled
pastry maker was Gigliola Spagnuolo’s father—which on Sunday was crowded
with men, young and old, buying pastries for their families. The two sons of
Silvio  Solara,  Marcello,  who  was  around  twenty,  and  Michele,  just  a  little
younger, bought a blue-and-white Fiat 1100 and on Sundays paraded around
the streets of the neighborhood.
Peluso’s former carpenter shop, which, once in the hands of Don Achille, had
become  a  grocery,  was  filled  with  good  things  that  spilled  out  onto  the
sidewalk, too. Passing by you caught a whiff of spices, of olives, of salami, of
fresh bread, of pork fat and cracklings that made you hungry. The death of Don
Achille had slowly detached his threatening shadow from that place and from
the whole family. The widow, Donna Maria, had grown very friendly and now
managed the store herself, along with Pinuccia, the fifteen-year-old daughter,
and Stefano, who was no longer the wild boy who had tried to pierce Lila’s
tongue but a self-possessed young man, his gaze charming, his smile gentle.
The  clientele  had  increased  greatly.  My  mother  sent  me  there  to  do  the
shopping, and my father wasn’t opposed, partly because when there was no
money Stefano wrote everything in a ledger book and we paid at the end of the
month.
Assunta, who sold fruit and vegetables on the streets with her husband,
Nicola, had had to retire because of bad back pain, and a few months later
pneumonia almost killed her husband. Yet those two misfortunes had turned
out to be a blessing. Now, going around the streets of the neighborhood every
morning with the horse-drawn cart, summer and winter, rain and shine, was
the oldest son, Enzo, who had almost nothing about him of the child who
threw rocks at us: he had become a stocky youth, with a strong, healthy look,
disheveled blond hair, blue eyes, a thick voice with which he praised his wares.
He  had  excellent  products  and  by  his  gestures  alone  conveyed  an  honest,
reassuring willingness to serve his customers. He handled the scale adroitly. I
liked the speed with which he pushed the weight along the arm to find the
right balance, the sound of iron scraping rapidly against iron, then wrapped
the potatoes or the fruit and hurried to put the package in Signora Spagnuolo’s
basket, or Melina’s, or my mother’s.
Initiatives  flourished  in  the  whole  neighborhood.  A  young  dressmaker
became a partner in the dry goods store, where Carmela Peluso had just started
working  as  a  clerk,  and  the  store  expanded,  aspiring  to  become  a  ladies’
clothing shop. The auto-repair shop where Melina’s son, Antonio, worked was
trying,  thanks  to  the  son  of  the  old  owner,  Gentile  Gorresio,  to  get  into
motorcycles. In other words everything was quivering, arching upward as if to
change  its  characteristics,  not  to  be  known  by  the  accumulated  hatreds,
tensions, ugliness but, rather, to show a new face. While Lila and I studied Latin
in the public gardens, even the pure and simple space around us, the fountain,
the  shrubbery,  a  pothole  on  one  side  of  the  street,  changed.  There  was  a
constant smell of pitch, the steamroller sputtered, advancing slowly over the
steamy asphalt, as bare-chested or T-shirted workers paved the streets and the
stradone. Even the colors changed. Pasquale, Carmela’s older brother, was hired
to cut down the brush near the railroad tracks. How much he cut—we heard
the sound of annihilation for days: the trees groaned, they gave off a scent of
fresh green wood, they cleaved the air, they struck the ground after a long
rustling that seemed a sigh, and he and others sawed them, split them, pulled
up roots that exhaled an odor of underground. The green brush vanished and
in its place appeared an area of flat yellow ground. Pasquale had found that job
through a stroke of luck. Sometime earlier a friend had told him that people
had come to the Bar Solara looking for young men to do night work cutting
down trees in a piazza in the center of Naples. He—even though he didn’t like
Silvio Solara and his sons, he was in that bar because his father was ruined—
had to support the family and had gone. He had returned, exhausted, at dawn,
his nostrils filled with the odor of living wood, of mangled leaves, and of the
sea. Then one thing led to another, and he had been summoned again for that
kind of work. And now he was on the construction site near the railroad and
we sometimes saw him climbing up the scaffolding of the new buildings that
were rising floor by floor, or in a hat made of newspaper, in the sun, eating
bread with sausage and greens during his lunch break.
Lila got mad if I looked at Pasquale and was distracted. It was soon obvious,
to my great amazement, that she already knew a lot of Latin. She knew the
declensions, for example, and also the verbs. Hesitantly I asked her how, and
she, with that spiteful expression of a girl who has no time to waste, admitted
that during my first year of middle school she had taken a grammar out of the
circulating library, the one managed by Maestro Ferraro, and had studied it out
of curiosity. The library was a great resource for her. As we talked, she showed
me proudly all the cards she had, four: one her own, one in Rino’s name, one
for her father, and one for her mother. With each she borrowed a book, so she
could  get  four  at  once.  She  devoured  them,  and  the  following  Sunday  she
brought them back and took four more.
I never asked her what books she had read and what books she was reading,
there wasn’t time, we had to study. She drilled me, and was furious if I didn’t
have the answers. Once she slapped me on the arm, hard, with her long, thin
hands, and didn’t apologize; rather, she said that if I kept making mistakes she
would hit me again, and harder. She was enchanted by the Latin dictionary, so
large,  pages  and  pages,  so  heavy—she  had  never  seen  one.  She  constantly
looked up words, not only the ones in the exercises but any that occurred to
her.
She  assigned  homework  in  the  tone  she  had  learned  from  our  teacher
Maestra Oliviero. She obliged me to translate thirty sentences a day, twenty
from Latin to Italian and ten from Italian to Latin. She translated them, too,
much more quickly than I did. At the end of the summer, when the exam was
approaching,  she  said  warily,  having  observed  skeptically  how  I  looked  up
words I didn’t know in the dictionary, in the same order in which I found them
in the sentence to be translated, fixed on the principal definitions, and only
then made an effort to understand the meaning: “Did the teacher tell you to do
it like that?”
The teacher never said anything, she simply assigned the exercises. I came
up with that method.
She was silent for a moment, then she said to me: “Read the whole sentence
in Latin first, then see where the verb is. According to the person of the verb
you can tell what the subject is. Once you have the subject you look for the
complements: the object if the verb is transitive, or if not other complements.
Try it like that.”
I tried. Suddenly translating seemed easy. In September I went to the exam, I
did the written part without a mistake and answered all the questions in the
oral part.
“Who gave you lessons?” the teacher asked, frowning.
“A friend.”
“A university student?”
I didn’t know what that meant. I said yes.
Lila was waiting for me outside, in the shade. When I came out I hugged her,
I told her that I had done really well and asked if we would study together the
following year. Since it was she who had first proposed that we meet just to
study, inviting her to continue seemed to me a good way of expressing my joy
and gratitude. She detached herself with a gesture almost of annoyance. She
said she just wanted to understand what that Latin was that those clever ones
studied.
“And then?”
“I’ve understood, that’s enough.”
“You don’t like it?”
“Yes. I’ll get some books from the library.”
“In Latin?”
“Yes.”
“But there’s still a lot to study.”
“You  study  for  me,  and  if  I  have  trouble  you’ll  help  me.  Now  I  have
something to do with my brother.”
“What?”
“I’ll show you later.”
8.
School began again and right away I did well in all the subjects. I couldn’t
wait for Lila to ask me to help her in Latin or anything else, and so, I think, I
studied not so much for school as for her. I became first in the class; even in
elementary school I hadn’t done so well.
That year it seemed to me that I expanded like pizza dough. I became fuller
in the chest, the thighs, the rear. One Sunday when I was going to the gardens,
where  I  was  planning  to  meet  Gigliola  Spagnuolo,  the  Solara  brothers
approached me in the 1100. Marcello, the older, was at the wheel, Michele, the
younger, was sitting next to him. They were both handsome, with glossy black
hair, white teeth. But of the two I liked Marcello better; he resembled Hector as
he was depicted in the school copy of the Iliad. They followed me the whole
way, I on the sidewalk and they next to me, in the 1100.
“Have you ever been in a car?”
“No.”
“Get in, we’ll take you for a ride.”
“My father won’t let me.”
“And we won’t tell him. When do you get the chance to ride in a car like
this?”
Never, I thought. But meanwhile I said no and kept saying no all the way to
the gardens, where the car accelerated and disappeared in a flash beyond the
buildings that were under construction. I said no because if my father found
out that I had gone in that car, even though he was a good and loving man,
even though he loved me very much, he would have beat me to death, while at
the same time my little brothers, Peppe and Gianni, young as they were, would
feel obliged, now and in the future, to try to kill the Solara brothers. There
were no written rules, everyone knew that was how it was. The Solaras knew
it, too, since they had been polite, and had merely invited me to get in.
They were not, some time later, with Ada, the oldest daughter of Melina
Cappuccio,  that  is  the  crazy  widow  who  had  caused  the  scandal  when  the
Sarratores moved. Ada was fourteen. On Sunday, in secret from her mother,
she put on lipstick and, with her long, straight legs, and breasts even larger
than mine, she looked grown-up and pretty. The Solara brothers made some
vulgar remarks to her, Michele grabbed her by the arm, opened the car door,
pulled her inside. They brought her back an hour later to the same place, and
Ada was a little angry, but also laughing.
But among those who saw her dragged into the car were some who reported
it to Antonio, her older brother, who worked as a mechanic in Gorresio’s shop.
Antonio was a hard worker, disciplined, very shy, obviously wounded by both
the untimely death of his father and the unbalanced behavior of his mother.
Without saying a single word to friends and relatives he waited in front of the
Bar Solara for Marcello and Michele, and when the brothers showed up he
confronted them, punching and kicking without even a word of preamble. For
a few minutes he managed pretty well, but then the father Solara and one of
the barmen came out. They beat Antonio bloody and none of the passersby,
none of the customers, intervened to help him.
We  girls  were  divided  on  this  episode.  Gigliola  Spagnuolo  and  Carmela
Peluso took the part of the Solaras, but only because they were handsome and
had an 1100. I wavered. In the presence of my two friends I favored the Solaras
and  we  competed  for  who  loved  them  most,  since  in  fact  they  were  very
handsome and it was impossible not to imagine the impression we would make
sitting next to one of them in the car. But I also felt that they had behaved
badly with Ada, and that Antonio, even though he wasn’t very good-looking,
even though he wasn’t muscular like the brothers, who went to the gym every
day  to  lift  weights,  had  been  courageous  in  confronting  them.  So  in  the
presence of Lila, who expressed without half measures that same position, I,
too, expressed some reservations.
Once the discussion became so heated that Lila, maybe because she wasn’t
developed as we were and didn’t know the pleasure-fear of having the Solaras’
gaze on her, became paler than usual and said that, if what happened to Ada
had happened to her, to avoid trouble for her father and her brother Rino she
would take care of the two of them herself.
“Because  Marcello  and  Michele  don’t  even  look  at  you,”  said  Gigliola
Spagnuolo, and we thought that Lila would get angry.
Instead she said seriously, “It’s better that way.”
She was as slender as ever, but tense in every fiber. I looked at her hands and
marveled: in a short time they had become like Rino’s, like her father’s, with
the skin at the tips yellowish and thick. Even if no one forced her—that wasn’t
her  job,  in  the  shop—she  had  started  to  do  small  tasks,  she  prepared  the
thread,  took  out  stitches,  glued,  even  stitched,  and  now  she  handled
Fernando’s tools almost like her brother. That was why that year she never
asked me anything about Latin. Eventually, she told me the plan she had in
mind, a thing that had nothing to do with books: she was trying to persuade
her father to make new shoes. But Fernando didn’t want to hear about it.
“Making shoes by hand,” he told her, “is an art without a future: today there
are cars and cars cost money and the money is either in the bank or with the
loan sharks, not in the pockets of the Cerullo family.” Then she insisted, she
filled him with sincere praise: “No one knows how to make shoes the way you
do,  Papa.”  Even  if  that  was  true,  he  responded,  everything  was  made  in
factories now, and since he had worked in the factories he knew very well what
lousy stuff came out of them; but there was little to do about it, when people
needed new shoes they no longer went to the neighborhood shoemaker, they
went to the stores in the center of town, on the Rettifilo, so even if you wanted
to  make  the  handcrafted  product  properly,  you  wouldn’t  sell  it,  you’d  be
throwing away money and labor, you’d ruin yourself.
Lila wouldn’t be convinced and as usual she had drawn Rino to her side. Her
brother had first agreed with his father, irritated by the fact that she interfered
in things to do with work, where it wasn’t a matter of books and he was the
expert. Then gradually he had been captivated and now he quarreled with
Fernando nearly every day, repeating what she had put into his head.
“Let’s at least try it.”
“No.”
“Have  you  seen  the  car  the  Solaras  have,  have  you  seen  how  well  the
Carraccis’ grocery is doing?”
“I’ve seen that the dry goods store that wanted to be a dressmaker’s gave it
up and I’ve seen that Gorresio, because of his son’s stupidity, has bitten off
more than he can chew with his motorcycles.”
“But the Solaras keep expanding.”
“Mind your own business and forget the Solaras.”
“Near the train tracks a new neighborhood is being developed.”
“Who gives a damn.”
“Papa, people are earning and they want to spend.”
“People spend on food because you have to eat every day. As for shoes, first
of all you don’t eat them, and, second, when they break you fix them and they
can last twenty years. Our work, right now, is to repair shoes and that’s it.”
I liked how that boy, who was always nice to me but capable of a brutality
that  frightened  even  his  father  a  little,  always,  in  every  circumstance,
supported his sister. I envied Lila that brother who was so solid, and sometimes
I thought that the real difference between her and me was that I had only little
brothers, and so no one with the power to encourage me and support me
against my mother, freeing my mind, while Lila could count on Rino, who
could defend her against anyone, whatever came into her mind. But really, I
thought that Fernando was right, and was on his side. And discussing it with
Lila, I discovered that she thought so, too.
Once she showed me the designs for shoes that she wanted to make with her
brother,  both  men’s  and  women’s.  They  were  beautiful  designs,  drawn  on
graph paper, rich in precisely colored details, as if she had had a chance to
examine shoes like that close up in some world parallel to ours and then had
fixed them on paper. In reality she had invented them in their entirety and in
every part, as she had done in elementary school when she drew princesses, so
that, although they were normal shoes, they didn’t resemble any that were
seen in the neighborhood, or even those of the actresses in the photo novels.
“Do you like them?”
“They’re really elegant.”
“Rino says they’re difficult.”
“But he knows how to make them?”
“He swears he can.”
“And your father?”
“He certainly could do it.”
“Then make them.”
“Papa doesn’t want to.”
“Why?”
“He said that as long as I’m playing, fine, but he and Rino can’t waste time
with me.”
“What does that mean?”
“It means that to actually do things takes time and money.”
She was on the point of showing me the figures she had put down, in secret
from Rino, to understand how much it really would cost to make them. Then
she stopped, folded up the pages she was holding, and told me it was pointless
to waste time: her father was right.
“But then?”
“We ought to try anyway.”
“Fernando will get mad.”
“If you don’t try, nothing ever changes.”
What had to change, in her view, was always the same thing: poor, we had to
become  rich;  having  nothing,  we  had  to  reach  a  point  where  we  had
everything. I tried to remind her of the old plan of writing novels like the
author of Little Women. I was stuck there, it was important to me. I was learning
Latin just for that, and deep inside I was convinced that she took so many
books from Maestro Ferraro’s circulating library only because, even though
she wasn’t going to school anymore, even though she was now obsessed with
shoes, she still wanted to write a novel with me and make a lot of money.
Instead, she shrugged in her careless way, she had changed her idea of Little
Women. “Now,” she explained, “to become truly rich you need a business.” So
she thought of starting with a single pair of shoes, just to demonstrate to her
father  how  beautiful  and  comfortable  they  were;  then,  once  Fernando  was
convinced, production would start: two pairs of shoes today, four tomorrow,
thirty in a month, four hundred in a year, so that, within a short time, they,
she,  her  father,  Rino,  her  mother,  her  other  siblings,  would  set  up  a  shoe
factory, with machines and at least fifty workers: the Cerullo shoe factory.
“A shoe factory?”
“Yes.”
She spoke with great conviction, as she knew how to do, with sentences, in
Italian, that depicted before my eyes the factory sign, Cerullo; the brand name
stamped on the uppers, Cerullo; and then the Cerullo shoes, all splendid, all
elegant, as in her drawings, shoes that once you put them on, she said, are so
beautiful and so comfortable that at night you go to sleep without taking them
off.
We laughed, we were having fun.
Then Lila paused. She seemed to realize that we were playing, as we had
with our dolls years earlier, with Tina and Nu in front of the cellar grating, and
she said, with an urgency for concreteness, which emphasized the impression
she gave off, of being part child, part old woman, which was, it seemed to me,
becoming her characteristic trait: “You know why the Solara brothers think
they’re the masters of the neighborhood?”
“Because they’re aggressive.”
“No, because they have money.”
“You think so?”
“Of  course.  Have  you  noticed  that  they’ve  never  bothered  Pinuccia
Carracci?”
“Yes.”
“And you know why they acted the way they did with Ada?”
“No.”
“Because Ada doesn’t have a father, her brother Antonio counts for nothing,
and she helps Melina clean the stairs of the buildings.”
As a result, either we, too, had to make money, more than the Solaras, or, to
protect ourselves against the brothers, we had to do them serious harm. She
showed me a sharp shoemaker’s knife that she had taken from her father’s
workshop.
“They won’t touch me, because I’m ugly and I don’t have my period,” she
said, “but with you they might. If anything happens, tell me.”
I looked at her in confusion. We were almost thirteen, we knew nothing
about institutions, laws, justice. We repeated, and did so with conviction, what
we had heard and seen around us since early childhood. Justice was not served
by violence? Hadn’t Signor Peluso killed Don Achille? I went home. I realized
that with those last words she had admitted that I was important to her, and I
was happy.
9.
I passed the exams at the end of middle school with eights, and a nine in
Italian and nine in Latin. I was the best in the school: better than Alfonso, who
had  an  average  of  eight,  and  much  better  than  Gino.  For  days  and  days  I
enjoyed that absolute superiority. I was much praised by my father, who began
to boast to everyone about his oldest daughter who had gotten nine in Italian
and nine, no less, in Latin. My mother, to my surprise, while she was in the
kitchen washing vegetables, said to me, without turning: “You can wear my
silver bracelet Sunday, but don’t lose it.”
I had less success in the courtyard. There only love and boyfriends counted.
When  I  said  to  Carmela  Peluso  that  I  was  the  best  in  the  school  she
immediately started talking to me about the way Alfonso looked at her when
he went by. Gigliola Spagnuolo was bitter because she had to repeat the exams
for Latin and mathematics and tried to regain prestige by saying that Gino was
after her but she was keeping him at a distance because she was in love with
Marcello  Solara  and  maybe  Marcello  also  loved  her.  Even  Lila  didn’t  show
particular  pleasure.  When  I  listed  my  grades,  subject  by  subject,  she  said
laughing, in her malicious tone, “You didn’t get ten?”
I was disappointed. You only got ten in behavior, the teachers never gave
anyone a ten in important subjects. But that sentence was enough to make a
latent thought become suddenly open: if she had come to school with me, in
the same class, if they had let her, she would have had all tens, and this I had
always known, and she also knew, and now she was making a point of it.
I went home with the pain of being first without really being first. Further,
my parents began to talk about where they could find a place for me, now that
I had a middle-school diploma. My mother wanted to ask the stationer to take
me as an assistant: in her view, clever as I was, I was suited to selling pens,
pencils, notebooks, and schoolbooks. My father imagined future dealings with
his acquaintances at the city hall that would settle me in a prestigious post. I
felt a sadness inside that, although it wasn’t defined, grew and grew and grew,
to the point where I didn’t even feel like going out on Sunday.
I was no longer pleased with myself, everything seemed tarnished. I looked
in the mirror and didn’t see what I would have liked to see. My blond hair had
turned brown.  I  had  a broad,  squashed  nose.  My whole  body  continued  to
expand but without increasing in height. And my skin, too, was spoiled: on my
forehead,  my  chin,  and  around  my  jaws,  archipelagos  of  reddish  swellings
multiplied, then turned purple, finally developed yellowish tips. I began, by my
own choice, to help my mother clean the house, to cook, to keep up with the
mess that my brothers made, to take care of Elisa, my little sister. In my spare
time I didn’t go out, I sat and read novels I got from the library: Grazia Deledda,
Pirandello, Chekhov, Gogol, Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky. Sometimes I felt a strong
need to go and see Lila at the shop and talk to her about the characters I liked
best, sentences I had learned by heart, but then I let it go: she would say
something mean; she would start talking about the plans she was making with
Rino, shoes, shoe factory, money, and I would slowly feel that the novels I read
were pointless and that my life was bleak, along with the future, and what I
would become: a fat pimply salesclerk in the stationery store across from the
parish church, an old maid employee of the local government, sooner or later
cross-eyed and lame.
One Sunday, inspired by an invitation that had arrived in the mail in my
name, in which Maestro Ferraro summoned me to the library that morning, I
finally decided to react. I tried to make myself pretty, as it seemed to me I had
been  in  childhood,  as  I  wished  to  believe  I  still  was.  I  spent  some  time
squeezing  the  pimples,  but  my  face  was  only  more  inflamed;  I  put  on  my
mother’s silver bracelet; I let down my hair. Still I was dissatisfied. Depressed I
went out into the heat that lay on the neighborhood like a hand swollen with
fever in that season, and made my way to the library.
I immediately realized, from the small crowd of parents and elementary-and
middle-school  children  flowing  toward  the  main  entrance,  that  something
wasn’t normal. I went in. There were rows of chairs already occupied, colored
festoons, the priest, Maestro Ferraro, even the principal of the elementary
school  and  Maestra  Oliviero.  Ferraro,  I  discovered,  had  had  the  idea  of
awarding a book to the readers who, according to his records, had been most
assiduous. Since the ceremony was about to begin and lending was suspended
for the moment, I sat at the back of the room. I looked for Lila, but saw only
Gigliola  Spagnuolo  with  Gino  and  Alfonso.  I  moved  restlessly  in  my  chair,
uneasy. After a while Carmela Peluso and her brother Pasquale sat down next
to me. Hi, hi. I covered my blotchy cheeks better with my hair.
The small ceremony began. The winners were: first Raffaella Cerullo, second
Fernando Cerullo, third Nunzia Cerullo, fourth Rino Cerullo, fifth Elena Greco,
that is, me.
I wanted to laugh, and so did Pasquale. We looked at each other, suffocating
our laughter, while Carmela whispered insistently, “Why are you laughing?”
We didn’t answer: we looked at each other again and laughed with our hands
over our mouths. Thus, still feeling that laughter in my eyes, and with an
unexpected sense of well-being, after the teacher had asked repeatedly and in
vain if anyone from the Cerullo family was in the room, he called me, fifth on
the list, to receive my prize. Praising me generously, Ferraro gave me Three
Men in a Boat, by Jerome K. Jerome. I thanked him and asked, in a whisper, “May
I also take the prizes for the Cerullo family, so I can deliver them?”
The teacher gave me the prize books for all the Cerullos. As we went out,
while  Carmela  resentfully  joined  Gigliola,  who  was  happily  chatting  with
Alfonso and Gino, Pasquale said to me, in dialect, things that made me laugh
even  more,  about  Rino  losing  his  eyesight  over  his  books,  Fernando  the
shoemaker who didn’t sleep at night because he was reading, Signora Nunzia
who read standing up, next to the stove, while she was cooking pasta with
potatoes, in one hand a novel and in the other the spoon. He had been in
elementary school with Rino, in the same class, at the same desk—he said, tears
of amusement in his eyes—and both of them, he and his friend, even though
they took turns helping each other, after six or seven years of school, including
repeats, managed to read at most: Tobacconist, Grocery, Post Office. Then he
asked me what the prize for his former schoolmate was.
“Bruges-la-Morte.”
“Are there ghosts?”
“I don’t know.”
“May I come along when you give it to him? Rather, may I give it to him,
with my own hands?”
We burst out laughing again.
“Yes.”
“They’ve given Rinuccio a prize. Crazy. It’s Lina who reads everything, good
Lord, that girl is clever.”
The attentions of Pasquale Peluso consoled me greatly, I liked that he made
me laugh. Maybe I’m not so ugly, I thought, maybe I can’t see myself.
At that moment I heard someone calling me. It was Maestra Oliviero.
I  went  over  and  she  looked  at  me,  as  always  evaluating,  and  said,  as  if
confirming the legitimacy of a more generous judgment about my looks: “How
pretty you are, how big you’ve gotten.”
“It’s not true, Maestra.”
“It’s true, you’re a star, healthy, nice, and plump. And also clever. I heard
that you were the top student in the school.”
“Yes.”
“Now what will you do?”
“I’ll go to work.”
She darkened.
“Don’t even mention it, you have to go on studying.”
I looked at her in surprise. What was there left to study? I didn’t know
anything about the order of schools, I didn’t have a clear idea what there was
after the middle school diploma. Words like high school, university were for
me without substance, like many of the words I came across in novels.
“I can’t, my parents won’t let me.”
“What did the literature teacher give you in Latin?”
“Nine.”
“Sure?”
“Yes.”
“Then I’ll talk to your parents.”
I started to leave, a little scared, I have to admit. If Maestra Oliviero really
went to my father and mother to tell them to let me continue in school, it
would again unleash quarrels that I didn’t want to face. I preferred things as
they were: help my mother, work in the stationery store, accept the ugliness
and the pimples, be healthy, nice, and plump, as Maestra Oliviero said, and toil
in poverty. Hadn’t Lila been doing it for at least three years already, apart from
her crazy dreams as the sister and daughter of shoemakers?
“Thank you, Maestra,” I said. “Goodbye.”
But Oliviero held me by one arm.
“Don’t waste time with him,” she said, indicating Pasquale, who was waiting
for me. “He’s a construction worker, he’ll never go farther than that. And then
he comes from a bad family, his father is a Communist, and murdered Don
Achille. I absolutely don’t want to see you with him—he’s surely a Communist
like his father.”
I nodded in assent and went off without saying goodbye to Pasquale, who
seemed bewildered. Then, with pleasure, I heard him following me, a dozen
steps behind. He wasn’t good-looking, but I wasn’t pretty anymore, either. He
had  curly  black  hair,  he  was  dark-skinned,  and  sunburned,  he  had  a  wide
mouth and was the son of a murderer, maybe even a Communist.
I turned the word over and over in my head, Communist, a word that was
meaningless  to  me,  but  which  the  teacher  had  immediately  branded  with
negativity. Communist, Communist, Communist. It captivated me. Communist
and son of a murderer.
Meanwhile,  around  the  corner,  Pasquale  caught  up  with  me.  We  walked
together until we were a few steps from my house and, laughing again, made a
date for the next day, when we would go to the shoemaker’s shop to give the
books to Lila and Rino. Before we parted Pasquale also said that the following
Sunday he, his sister, and anyone who wanted were going to Gigliola’s house to
learn to dance. He asked if I wanted to go, maybe with Lila. I was astonished, I
already knew that my mother would never let me. But still I said, all right, I’ll
think about it. Then he held out his hand, and I, who was not used to such
gestures, hesitated, just brushed his, which was hard and rough, and withdrew
mine.
“Are you always going to be a construction worker?” I asked, even though I
already knew that he was.
“Yes.”
“And you’re a Communist?”
He looked at me perplexed.
“Yes.”
“And you go to see your father at Poggioreale?”
He turned serious: “When I can.”
“Bye.”
“Bye.”
10.
Maestra  Oliviero,  that  same  afternoon,  presented  herself  at  my  house
without warning, throwing my father into utter despair and embittering my
mother. She made them both swear that they would enroll me in the nearest
classical high school. She offered to find me the books I would need herself.
She reported to my father, but looking at me severely, that she had seen me
alone with Pasquale Peluso, company that was completely unsuitable for me,
who embodied such high hopes.
My parents didn’t dare contradict her. They swore solemnly that they would
send me to the first year of high school, and my father said, in a menacing
tone, “Lenù, don’t you dare ever speak to Pasquale Peluso again.” Before she
left, the teacher asked me about Lila, still in the presence of my parents. I
answered  that  she  was  helping  her  father  and  her  brother,  she  kept  the
accounts and the shop in order. She made a grimace of contempt, she asked
me: “Does she know you got a nine in Latin?”
I nodded yes.
“Tell her that now you’re going to study Greek, too. Tell her.”
She took leave of my parents with an air of pride.
“This girl,” she exclaimed, “will bring us great satisfaction.”
That evening, while my mother, furious, was saying that now there was no
choice but to send me to the school for rich people, otherwise Oliviero would
wear her out by tormenting her and would even fail little Elisa in reprisal;
while my father, as if this were the main problem, threatened to break both my
legs if he heard that I had been alone with Pasquale Peluso, we heard a loud cry
that silenced us. It was Ada, Melina’s daughter, crying for help.
We ran to the window, there was a great commotion in the courtyard. It
seemed that Melina, who after the Sarratores moved had generally behaved
herself—a  little  melancholy,  yes,  a  little  absentminded,  but  in  essence  her
eccentricities had become infrequent and harmless, like singing loudly while
she washed the stairs of the buildings, or dumping buckets of dirty water into
the street without paying attention to passersby—was having a new crisis of
madness, a sort of crazy outburst of joy. She was laughing, jumping on the bed,
and pulling up her skirt, displaying her fleshless thighs and her underpants to
her frightened children. This my mother found out, by questioning from her
window the other women looking out of their windows. I saw that Nunzia
Cerullo and Lila were hurrying to see what was happening and I tried to slip
out the door to join them, but my mother stopped me. She smoothed her hair
and, with her limping gait, went herself to see what was going on.
When she returned she was indignant. Someone had delivered a book to
Melina. A book, yes, a book. To her, who had at most two years of elementary
school and had never read a book in her life. The book bore on the cover the
name of Donato Sarratore. Inside, on the first page, it had an inscription in pen
to Melina and also marked, with red ink, were the poems he had written for
her.
My  father,  hearing  that  strange  news,  insulted  the  railway-worker  poet
obscenely. My mother said someone should undertake to bash the disgusting
head of that disgusting man. All night we heard Melina singing with happiness,
we heard the voices of her children, especially Antonio and Ada, trying to calm
her but failing.
I, however, was overcome with amazement. On a single day I had attracted
the attention of a young man like Pasquale, a new school had opened up before
me, and I had discovered that a person who until some time earlier had lived in
the neighborhood, in the building across from ours, had published a book. This
last fact proved that Lila had been right to think that such a thing could even
happen to us. Of course, she had given it up now, but perhaps I, by going to
that difficult school called high school, fortified by the love of Pasquale, could
write one myself, as Sarratore had done. Who knows, if everything worked out
for the best I would become rich before Lila with her shoe designs and her shoe
factory.
11.
The next day I went secretly to meet Pasquale Peluso. He arrived out of
breath and sweaty in his work clothes, spotted all over with splotches of white
plaster. On the way I told him the story of Donato and Melina. I told him that in
these latest events was the proof that Melina wasn’t mad, that Donato really
had been in love with her and still loved her. But as I spoke, even as Pasquale
agreed with me, revealing a sensitivity about things to do with love, I realized
that, of these developments, what continued to excite me more than anything
else was the fact that Donato Sarratore had published a book. That employee of
the state railroad had become the author of a volume that Maestro Ferraro
might very well put in the library and lend. Therefore, I said to Pasquale, we
had all known not an ordinary man, put upon by the nagging of his wife, Lidia,
but  a  poet.  Therefore,  right  before  our  eyes  a  tragic  love  had  been  born,
inspired by a person we knew very well, that is to say Melina. I was very
excited, my heart was pounding. But I realized that here Pasquale couldn’t
follow me, he said yes only so as not to contradict me. And in fact after a while
he became evasive, and began to ask me questions about Lila: how she had
been at school, what I thought of her, if we were close friends. I answered
willingly: it was the first time anyone had asked me about our friendship and I
talked about it enthusiastically the whole way. Also for the first time, I felt
how, having to search for words on a subject where I didn’t have words ready, I
tended to reduce the relationship between Lila and me to extreme declarations
that were all exaggeratedly positive.
When  we  got  to  the  shoemaker’s  shop  we  were  still  talking  about  it.
Fernando had gone home for the afternoon rest, but Lila and Rino stood next
to each other scowling, bent over something that they looked at with hostility,
and as soon as they saw us outside the glass door they put it away. I handed
Maestro Ferraro’s gifts to Lila, while Pasquale teased Rino, opening the prize
under his nose and saying, “After you’ve read the story of this Bruges-the-dead
tell me if you liked it and maybe I’ll read it, too.” They laughed a lot, and every
so often whispered to each other remarks about Bruges, which were surely
obscene. But I noticed that Pasquale, although he was joking with Rino, looked
furtively at Lila. Why was he looking at her like that, what was he looking for,
what did he see there? They were long, intense looks that she didn’t seem to be
aware of, while—it seemed to me—Rino was even more aware of them than I
was,  and  he  soon  drew  Pasquale  out  into  the  street  as  if  to  keep  us  from
hearing what was so funny about Bruges, but in reality irritated by the way his
friend was looking at his sister.
I went with Lila to the back of the shop, trying to perceive in her what had
attracted Pasquale’s attention. She seemed to me the same slender girl, skin
and bone, pale, except perhaps for the larger shape of her eyes and a slight
curve in her chest. She arranged the books with other books she had, amid the
old  shoes  and  some  notebooks  with  battered  covers.  I  mentioned  Melina’s
madness, but above all I tried to communicate my excitement at the fact that
we  could  say  we  knew  someone  who  had  just  published  a  book,  Donato
Sarratore. I murmured in Italian: “Think, his son Nino was in school with us;
think, the whole Sarratore family might become rich.” She gave a skeptical half
smile.
“With this?” she said. She held out her hand and showed me Sarratore’s
book.
Antonio, Melina’s oldest son, had given it to her to get it out of the sight and
hands  of  his  mother.  I  held  it,  I  examined  the  slim  volume.  It  was  called
Attempts at Serenity. The cover was red, with a drawing of the sun shining on a
mountaintop. It was exciting to read, right above the title: “Donato Sarratore.”
I opened it, read aloud the dedication in pen: To Melina who nurtured my poetry.
Donato. Naples, 12 June 1958. I was moved, I felt a shiver at the back of my neck, at
the roots of my hair. I said, “Nino will have a better car than the Solaras.”
But Lila had one of her intense looks and I saw that she was focused on the
book I had in my hand. “If it happens we’ll know about it,” she muttered. “For
now those poems have done only damage.”
“Why?”
“Sarratore didn’t have the courage to go in person to Melina and in his place
he sent her the book.”
“Isn’t it a fine thing?”
“Who knows. Now Melina expects him, and if Sarratore doesn’t come she’ll
suffer more than she’s suffered till now.”
What wonderful conversations. I looked at her white, smooth skin, not a
blemish. I looked at her lips, the delicate shape of her ears. Yes, I thought,
maybe she’s changing, and not only physically but in the way she expresses
herself. It seemed to me—articulated in words of today—that not only did she
know how to put things well but she was developing a gift that I was already
familiar with: more effectively than she had as a child, she took the facts and in
a natural way charged them with tension; she intensified reality as she reduced
it to words, she injected it with energy. But I also realized, with pleasure, that,
as soon as she began to do this, I felt able to do the same, and I tried and it
came easily. This—I thought contentedly—distinguishes me from Carmela and
all the others: I get excited with her, here, at the very moment when she’s
speaking to me. What beautiful strong hands she had, what graceful gestures
came to her, what looks.
But while Lila talked about love, while I talked about it, the pleasure was
spoiled  by  an  ugly  thought.  I  suddenly  realized  that  I  had  been  mistaken:
Pasquale the construction worker, the Communist, the son of the murderer,
had wanted to go there with me not for me but for her, to have the chance to
see her.
12.
The thought took my breath away for a moment. When the two young men
returned, interrupting our conversation, Pasquale confessed, laughing, that he
had left the work site without saying anything to the boss, so he had to go back
right away. I noticed that he looked at Lila again, for a long time, intensely,
almost against his will, perhaps to signal to her: I’m running the risk of losing
my job just for you. Addressing Rino, he said: “Sunday we’re all going dancing
at Gigliola’s, even Lenuccia’s coming, will you two come?”
“Sunday is a long way off, we’ll think about it later,” Rino answered.
Pasquale gave a last look at Lila, who paid no attention to him, then he
slipped away without asking if I wanted to go with him.
I  felt  an  irritation  that  made  me  nervous.  I  began  touching  the  most
inflamed areas of my cheeks with my fingers, then I realized it and forced
myself not to. While Rino took out from under the bench the things he had
been working on before we arrived, and was studying them in bewilderment, I
started  talking  again  to  Lila  about  books,  about  love  affairs.  We  inflated
excessively Sarratore, Melina’s love madness, the role of the book. What would
happen? What reactions would be unleashed not by the reading of the poems
but by the object itself, the fact that its cover, the title, the name and surname
had  again  stirred  that  woman’s  heart?  We  talked  so  fervently  that  Rino
suddenly lost patience and shouted at us: “Will you stop it? Lila, let’s get to
work, otherwise Papa will return and we won’t be able to do anything.”
We stopped. I glanced at what they were doing: a wooden form besieged by a
tangle of soles, strips of skin, pieces of thick leather, amid knives and awls and
various other tools. Lila told me that she and Rino were trying to make a man’s
traveling shoe, and her brother, right afterward, made me swear on my sister
Elisa that I would never say a word about it to anyone. They were working in
secret from Fernando, Rino had got the skins and the leather from a friend who
worked at a tannery at Ponte di Casanova. They would devote five minutes
here, ten tomorrow, to making the shoe, because there was no way to persuade
their  father  to  help  them;  in  fact  when  they  had  brought  up  the  subject
Fernando had sent Lila home, shouting that he didn’t want to see her in the
shop anymore, and meanwhile he had threatened to kill Rino, who at the age
of nineteen was lacking in respect and had got it in his head to be better than
his father.
I pretended to be interested in their secret undertaking, but in fact I was
very sorry about it. Although the two siblings had involved me by choosing me
as their confidant, it was still an experience that I could enter only as witness:
on that path Lila would do great things by herself, I was excluded. But above
all, how, after our intense conversations about love and poetry, could she walk
me to the door, as she was doing, far more absorbed in the atmosphere of
excitement around a shoe? We had talked with such pleasure about Sarratore
and Melina. I couldn’t believe that, though she pointed out to me that heap of
leathers and skins and tools, she did not still feel, as I did, the anxiety about a
woman who was suffering for love. What did I care about shoes. I still had, in
my mind’s eye, the most secret stages of that affair of violated trust, passion,
poetry that became a book, and it was as if she and I had read a novel together,
as if we had seen, there in the back of the shop and not in the parish hall on
Sunday, a dramatic film. I felt grieved at the waste, because I was compelled to
go away, because she preferred the adventure of the shoes to our conversation,
because she knew how to be autonomous whereas I needed her, because she
had her things that I couldn’t be part of, because Pasquale, who was a grown-
up, not a boy, certainly would seek other occasions to gaze at her and plead
with her and try to persuade her to secretly be his girlfriend, and be kissed,
touched, as it was said people did when they became boyfriend and girlfriend—
because, in short, she would feel that I was less and less necessary.
Therefore,  as  if  to  chase  away  the  feeling  of  revulsion  these  thoughts
inspired, as if to emphasize my value and my indispensability, I told her in a
rush that I was going to the high school. I told her at the doorway of the shop,
when I was already in the street. I told her that Maestra Oliviero had insisted to
my  parents,  promising  to  get  me  used  books,  for  nothing,  herself.  I  did  it
because I wanted her to realize that I was special, and that, even if she became
rich making shoes with Rino, she couldn’t do without me, as I couldn’t do
without her.
She looked at me perplexed.
“What is high school?” she asked.
“An important school that comes after middle school.”
“And what are you going there to do?”
“Study.”
“What?”
“Latin.”
“That’s all?”
“And Greek.”
“Greek?”
“Yes.”
She had the expression of someone at a loss, finding nothing to say. Finally
she murmured, irrelevantly, “Last week I got my period.”
And although Rino hadn’t called her, she went back inside.
13.
So now she was bleeding, too. The secret movements of the body, which had
reached me first, had arrived like the tremor of an earthquake in her as well
and would change her, she was already changing. Pasquale—I thought—had
realized it before me. He and probably other boys. The fact that I was going to
high  school  quickly  lost  its  aura.  For  days  all  I  could  think  of  was  the
unknowability of the changes that would hit Lila. Would she become pretty
like Pinuccia Carracci or Gigliola or Carmela? Would she turn ugly like me? I
went home and examined myself in the mirror. What was I like, really? What
would she, sooner or later, be like?
I  began  to  take  more  care  with  myself.  One  Sunday  afternoon,  on  the
occasion of the usual walk from the stradone to the gardens, I put on my best
dress, which was blue, with a square neckline, and also my mother’s silver
bracelet. When I met Lila I felt a secret pleasure in seeing her as she was every
day,  in  a  worn,  faded  dress,  her  black  hair  untidy.  There  was  nothing  to
differentiate her from the usual Lila, a restless, skinny girl. Only she seemed
taller, she had grown, from a small girl, almost as tall as me, maybe half an inch
less. But what was that change? I had a large bosom, a womanly figure.
We reached the gardens, we turned and went back, then walked along the
street  again  to  the  gardens.  It  was  early,  there  wasn’t  yet  the  Sunday
commotion, the sellers of roasted hazelnuts and almonds and lupini. Lila was
again asking me tentatively about the high school. I told her what I knew,
exaggerating as much as possible. I wanted her to be curious, to want at least a
little to share my adventure from the outside, to feel she was losing something
of me as I always feared losing much of her. I was on the street side, she on the
inside. I was talking, she was listening attentively.
The Solaras’ 1100 pulled up beside us, Michele was driving, next to him was
Marcello, who began to joke with us. With both of us, not just me. He would
sing softly, in dialect, phrases like: what lovely young ladies, aren’t you tired of
going back and forth, look how big Naples is, the most beautiful city in the
world, as beautiful as you, get in, half an hour and we’ll bring you back here.
I shouldn’t have but I did. Instead of going straight ahead as if neither he nor
the  car  nor  his  brother  existed;  instead  of  continuing  to  talk  to  Lila  and
ignoring them, I turned and, out of a need to feel attractive and lucky and on
the verge of going to the rich people’s school, where I would likely find boys
with cars much nicer than the Solaras’, said, in Italian:
“Thank you, but we can’t.”
Marcello reached out a hand. I saw that it was broad and short, although he
was a tall, well-made young man. The five fingers passed through the window
and grabbed me by the wrist, while his voice said: “Michè, slow down, you see
that nice bracelet the porter’s daughter is wearing?”
The car stopped. Marcello’s fingers around my wrist made my skin turn cold,
and I pulled my arm away in disgust. The bracelet broke, falling between the
sidewalk and the car.
“Oh, my God, look what you’ve made me do,” I exclaimed, thinking of my
mother.
“Calm down,” he said, and, opening the door, got out of the car. “I’ll fix it for
you.”
He was smiling, friendly, he tried again to take my wrist as if to establish a
familiarity that would soothe me. It was an instant. Lila, half the size of him,
pushed  him  against  the  car  and  whipped  the  shoemaker’s  knife  under  his
throat.
She  said  calmly,  in  dialect,  “Touch  her  again  and  I’ll  show  you  what
happens.”
Marcello, incredulous, froze. Michele immediately got out of the car and said
in a reassuring tone: “Don’t worry, Marcè, this whore doesn’t have the guts.”
“Come here,” Lila said, “come here, and you’ll find out if I have the guts.”
Michele came around the car, and I began to cry. From where I was I could
see that the point of the knife had already cut Marcello’s skin, a scratch from
which came a tiny thread of blood. The scene is clear in my mind: it was still
very hot, there were few passersby, Lila was on Marcello as if she had seen a
nasty insect on his face and wanted to chase it away. In my mind there remains
the absolute certainty I had then: she wouldn’t have hesitated to cut his throat.
Michele also realized it.
“O.K., good for you,” he said, and with the same composure, as if he were
amused, he got back in the car. “Get in, Marcè, apologize to the ladies, and let’s
go.”
Lila slowly removed the point of the blade from Marcello’s throat. He gave
her a timid smile, his gaze was disoriented.
“Just a minute,” he said.
He knelt on the sidewalk, in front of me, as if he wanted to apologize by
subjecting himself to the highest form of humiliation. He felt around under the
car, recovered the bracelet, examined it, and repaired it by squeezing with his
nails the silver link that had come apart. He gave it to me, looking not at me
but at Lila. It was to her that he said, “Sorry.” Then he got in the car and they
drove off.
“I was crying because of the bracelet, not because I was scared,” I said.
14.
The boundaries of the neighborhood faded in the course of that summer.
One morning my father took me with him. Since I was enrolling in high school,
he wanted me to know what public transportation I would have to take and
what route when I went in October to the new school.
It was a beautiful, very clear, windy day. I felt loved, coddled, to my affection
for him was added a crescendo of admiration. He knew the enormous expanse
of the city intimately, he knew where to get the metro or a tram or a bus.
Outside he behaved with a sociability, a relaxed courtesy, that at home he
almost never had. He was friendly toward everyone, on the metro and the
buses, in the offices, and he always managed to let his interlocutor know that
he  worked  for  the  city  and  that,  if  he  liked,  he  could  speed  up  practical
matters, open doors.
We  spent  the  entire  day  together,  the  only  one  in  our  lives,  I  don’t
remember  any  others.  He  dedicated  himself  to  me,  as  if  he  wanted  to
communicate in a few hours everything useful he had learned in the course of
his existence. He showed me Piazza Garibaldi and the station that was being
built: according to him it was so modern that the Japanese were coming from
Japan to study it—in particular the columns—and build an identical one in
their country. But he confessed that he liked the old station better, he was
more attached to it. Ah well. Naples, he said, had always been like that: it’s cut
down, it’s broken up, and then it’s rebuilt, and the money flows and creates
work.
He took me along Corso Garibaldi, to the building that would be my school.
He dealt in the office with extreme good humor, he had the gift of congeniality,
a gift that in the neighborhood and at home he kept hidden. He boasted of my
extraordinary report card to a janitor whose wedding witness, he discovered
on the spot, he knew well. I heard him repeating often: everything in order?
Or: everything that can be done is being done. He showed me Piazza Carlo III,
the Albergo dei Poveri, the botanical garden, Via Foria, the museum. He took
me on Via Costantinopoli, to Port’Alba, to Piazza Dante, to Via Toledo. I was
overwhelmed by the names, the noise of the traffic, the voices, the colors, the
festive atmosphere, the effort of keeping everything in mind so that I could
talk about it later with Lila, the ease with which he chatted with the pizza
maker from whom he bought me a pizza melting with ricotta, the fruit seller
from  whom  he  bought  me  a  yellow  peach.  Was  it  possible  that  only  our
neighborhood was filled with conflicts and violence, while the rest of the city
was radiant, benevolent?
He took me to see the place where he worked, in Piazza Municipio. There,
too, he said, everything had changed, the trees had been cut down, everything
was broken up: now see all the space, the only old thing left is the Maschio
Angioino, but it’s beautiful, little one, there are two real males in Naples, your
father and that fellow there. We went to the city hall, he greeted this person
and that, everyone knew him. With some he was friendly, and introduced me,
repeating yet again that in school I had gotten nine in Italian and nine in Latin;
with others he was almost mute, only, indeed, yes, you command and I obey.
Finally he said that he would show me Vesuvius from close up, and the sea.
It was an unforgettable moment. We went toward Via Caracciolo, as the
wind grew stronger, the sun brighter. Vesuvius was a delicate pastel-colored
shape, at whose base the whitish stones of the city were piled up, with the
earth-colored slice of the Castel dell’Ovo, and the sea. But what a sea. It was
very rough, and loud; the wind took your breath away, pasted your clothes to
your body and blew the hair off your forehead. We stayed on the other side of
the street in a small crowd, watching the spectacle. The waves rolled in like
blue metal tubes carrying an egg white of foam on their peaks, then broke in a
thousand glittering splinters and came up to the street with an oh of wonder
and fear from those watching. What a pity that Lila wasn’t there. I felt dazed by
the powerful gusts, by the noise. I had the impression that, although I was
absorbing much of that sight, many things, too many, were scattering around
me without letting me grasp them.
My father held tight to my hand as if he were afraid that I would slip away.
In fact I had the wish to leave him, run, move, cross the street, be struck by the
brilliant scales of the sea. At that tremendous moment, full of light and sound, I
pretended I was alone in the newness of the city, new myself with all life
ahead, exposed to the mutable fury of things but surely triumphant: I, I and
Lila, we two with that capacity that together—only together—we had to seize
the mass of colors, sounds, things, and people, and express it and give it power.
I returned to the neighborhood as if I had gone to a distant land. Here again
the known streets, here again the grocery of Stefano and his sister Pinuccia,
Enzo who sold fruit, the Solaras’ 1100 parked in front of the bar—now I would
have paid any amount for it to be eliminated from the face of the earth. Luckily
my mother had never found out about the episode of the bracelet. Luckily no
one had reported to Rino what had happened.
I told Lila about the streets, their names, the noise, the extraordinary light.
But immediately I felt uncomfortable. If she had been telling the story of that
day, I would have joined in with an indispensable counter-melody and, even if I
hadn’t been present, I would have felt alive and active, I would have asked
questions, raised issues, I would have tried to show her that we had to take that
same journey together, necessarily, because I would be enriched by it, I would
have been a much better companion than her father. She instead listened to
me without curiosity, and at first I thought it was malicious, to diminish the
force of my enthusiasm. But I had to persuade myself it wasn’t so, she simply
had  her  own  train  of  thought  that  was  fed  on  concrete  things,  a  book,  a
fountain. With her ears certainly she listened to me, but with her eyes, with
her mind, she was solidly anchored to the street, to the few plants in the
gardens, to Gigliola, who was walking with Alfonso and Carmela, to Pasquale,
who waved at her from the scaffolding of the building site, to Melina, who
spoke out loud of Donato Sarratore while Ada tried to drag her into the house,
to Stefano, the son of Don Achille, who had just bought a Giardinetta, and had
his mother beside him and in the backseat his sister Pinuccia, to Marcello and
Michele Solara, who passed in their 1100, with Michele pretending not to see
us while Marcello gave us a friendly glance, and, above all, to the secret work,
kept hidden from her father, that she applied herself to, advancing the project
of the shoes. My story, for her, was at that moment only a collection of useless
signals from useless spaces. She would be concerned with those spaces only if
she had the opportunity to go there. And in fact, after all my talk, she said only:
“I  have  to  tell  Rino  that  Sunday  we  should  accept  Pasquale  Peluso’s
invitation.”
There I was, telling her about the center of Naples, and she placed at the
center Gigliola’s house, in one of the apartment buildings of the neighborhood,
where Pasquale wanted to take her dancing. I was sorry. To Peluso’s invitations
we had always said yes and yet we had never gone, I to avoid arguments with
my parents, she because Rino was against it. We often saw him, on holidays, all
cleaned up, waiting for his friends, old and young. He was a generous soul, he
didn’t make distinctions of age, he brought along anyone. He would wait in
front  of  the  gas  station  and,  one  or  two  at  a  time,  Enzo  and  Gigliola,  and
Carmela who now called herself Carmen, and sometimes Rino himself if he had
nothing else to do, and Antonio, who had the weight of his mother, Melina,
and, if Melina was calm, also his sister Ada, whom the Solaras had dragged into
their car and driven who knows where for an hour. When the day was fine they
went to the sea, returning red-faced from the sun. Or, more often, they all met
at Gigliola’s, whose parents were more tolerant than ours, and there those who
knew how to dance danced and those who didn’t learned.
Lila began to go to these little parties, and to take me; she had developed, I
don’t know how, an interest in dancing. Both Pasquale and Rino turned out to
be surprisingly good dancers, and we learned from them the tango, the waltz,
the polka, and the mazurka. Rino, it should be said, as a teacher got annoyed
immediately, especially with his sister, while Pasquale was very patient. At first
he would have us dance standing on his feet, so that we learned the steps, then,
when we became more skilled, we went whirling through the house.
I discovered that I liked to dance, I would have danced forever. Lila instead
wore the expression of someone who wants to understand how it’s done, and
whose pleasure seems to consist entirely in learning, since often she stayed
seated, watching us, studying us, and applauding the couples who were most in
synch. Once, at her house, she showed me a book that she had taken from the
library: it was all about the dances, and every movement was explained with
black-and-white drawings of a man and woman dancing. She was very cheerful
in that period, with an exuberance surprising in her. Abruptly she grabbed me
around the waist and, playing the man, made me dance the tango as she sang
the music. Rino looked in and saw us, and burst into laughter. He wanted to
dance, too, first with me, then with his sister, though without music. While we
danced he told me that Lila had such a mania for perfection that she was
obliged to practice continuously, even if they didn’t have a gramophone. But as
soon  as  he  said  the  word—gramophone,  gramophone,  gramophone—Lila
shouted at me from a corner of the room, narrowing her eyes.
“You know what kind of word it is?”
“No.”
“Greek.”
I looked at her uncertainly. Rino meanwhile let me go and went to dance
with his sister, who gave a soft cry, handed me the dance manual, and flew
around the room with him. I placed the manual among her books. What had
she said? Gramophone was Italian, not Greek. But meanwhile I saw that under
War and Peace, and bearing the label of Maestro Ferraro’s library, a tattered
volume was sticking out, entitled Greek Grammar. Grammar. Greek. I heard her
promising me, out of breath:
“Afterward I’ll write gramophone for you in Greek letters.”
I said I had things to do and left.
15.
She had begun to study Greek even before I went to high school? She had
done  it  on  her  own,  while  I  hadn’t  even  thought  about  it,  and  during  the
summer, the vacation? Would she always do the things I was supposed to do,
before and better than me? She eluded me when I followed her and meanwhile
stayed close on my heels in order to pass me by?
I tried not to see her for a while, I was angry. I went to the library to get a
Greek grammar, but there was only one, and the whole Cerullo family had
borrowed it in turn. Maybe I should erase Lila from myself like a drawing from
the blackboard, I thought, for, I think, the first time. I felt fragile, exposed, I
couldn’t spend my time following her or discovering that she was following
me, either way feeling diminished. I immediately went to find her. I let her
teach me how to do the quadrille. I let her show me how many Italian words
she could write in the Greek alphabet. She wanted me to learn the alphabet
before I went to school, and she forced me to write and read it. I got even more
pimples.  I  went  to  the  dances  at  Gigliola’s  with  a  permanent  sense  of
inadequacy and shame.
I hoped that it would pass, but inadequacy and shame intensified. Once Lila
danced a waltz with her brother. They danced so well together that we left
them  the  whole  space.  I  was  spellbound.  They  were  beautiful,  they  were
perfect together. As I watched, I understood conclusively that soon she would
lose completely her air of a child-old woman, the way a well-known musical
theme is lost when it’s adapted too fancifully. She had become shapely. Her
high forehead, her large eyes that could suddenly narrow, her small nose, her
cheekbones,  her  lips,  her  ears  were  looking  for  a  new  orchestration  and
seemed close to finding it. When she combed her hair in a ponytail, her long
neck was revealed with a touching clarity. Her chest had small graceful breasts
that were more and more visible. Her back made a deep curve before landing at
the increasingly taut arc of her behind. Her ankles were still too thin, the
ankles  of  a  child;  but  how  long  before  they  adapted  to  her  now  feminine
figure?  I  realized  that  the  males,  watching  as  she  danced  with  Rino,  were
seeing more than I was. Pasquale above all, but also Antonio, also Enzo. They
kept their eyes on her as if we others had disappeared. And yet I had bigger
breasts. And yet Gigliola was a dazzling blonde, with regular features and nice
legs.  And  yet  Carmela  had  beautiful  eyes  and,  especially,  provocative
movements.  But  there  was  nothing  to  be  done:  something  had  begun  to
emanate from Lila’s mobile body that the males sensed, an energy that dazed
them, like the swelling sound of beauty arriving. The music had to stop before
they returned to themselves, with uncertain smiles and extravagant applause.
16.
Lila was malicious: this, in some secret place in myself, I still thought. She
had shown me not only that she knew how to wound with words but that she
would kill without hesitation, and yet those capacities now seemed to me of
little importance. I said to myself: she will release something more vicious, and
I  resorted  to  the  word  “evil”,  an  exaggerated  word  that  came  to  me  from
childhood tales. But if it was a childish self that unleashed these thoughts in
me, they had a foundation of truth. And in fact, it slowly became clear not only
to me, who had been observing her since elementary school, but to everyone,
that an essence not only seductive but dangerous emanated from Lila.
Toward the end of the summer there was increasing pressure on Rino to
take his sister on the group excursions outside the neighborhood for a pizza,
for a walk. Rino, however, wanted his own space. He, too, seemed to me to be
changing, Lila had kindled his imagination and his hopes. But, to see him, to
hear him—the effect hadn’t been the best. He had become more of a braggart,
he never missed a chance to allude to how good he was at his work and how
rich he was going to be, and he often repeated a remark he was fond of: It
won’t take much, just a little luck, and I’ll piss in the Solaras’ face. When he was
boasting like this, however, it was crucial that his sister not be present. In her
presence he was confused, he made a few allusions, then let it go. He realized
that Lila was giving him a distrustful look, as if he were betraying a secret pact
of behavior, of detachment, and so he preferred not to have her around; they
were working together all day anyway in the shoemaker’s shop. He escaped
and swaggered like a peacock with his friends. But sometimes he had to give in.
One Sunday, after many discussions with our parents, we went out (Rino had
generously come to my house and, before my parents, assumed responsibility
for my person), in the evening no less. We saw the city lighted up by signs, the
crowded streets, we smelled the stench of fish gone bad in the heat but also the
fragrance of restaurants, of the fried food stalls, of bar-pastry shops much
more  lavish  than  the  Solaras’.  I  don’t  remember  if  Lila  had  already  had  a
chance to go to the center, with her brother or others. Certainly if she had she
hadn’t told me about it. I remember instead that that night she was absolutely
mute. We crossed Piazza Garibaldi, but she stayed behind, lingering to watch a
shoeshine, a large painted woman, the dark men, the boys. She stared at people
attentively, she looked them right in the face, so that some laughed and others
made a gesture meaning “What do you want?” Every so often I gave her a tug,
dragging her with me out of fear that we would lose Rino, Pasquale, Antonio,
Carmela, Ada.
That night we went to a pizzeria on the Rettifilo. We ate happily. To me it
seemed  that  Antonio  wooed  me  a  little,  making  an  effort  to  overcome  his
timidity, and I was pleased because at least Pasquale’s attentions to Lila were
counterbalanced. But at some point the pizza maker, a man in his thirties,
began to spin the dough in the air, while he was working it, with extreme
virtuosity,  and  he  exchanged  smiles  with  Lila,  who  looked  at  him  in
admiration.
“Stop it,” Rino said to her.
“I’m not doing anything,” she said and tried to look in another direction.
But things got worse. Pasquale, smiling, said that the man, the pizza maker—
who to us girls seemed old, he was wearing a wedding ring, was surely the
father of children—had secretly blown a kiss to Lila on the tips of his fingers.
We turned suddenly to look at him: he was doing his job, that was all. But
Pasquale, still smiling, asked Lila, “Is it true or am I wrong?”
Lila, with  a  nervous  laugh  in  contrast to  Pasquale’s  broad  smile,  said,  “I
didn’t see anything.”
“Forget it, Pascà,” said Rino, giving his sister a cutting look.
But Peluso got up, went to the counter in front of the oven, walked around
it, and, a candid smile on his lips, slapped the pizza maker in the face, so that
he fell against the mouth of the oven.
The owner of the place, a small, pale man in his sixties, hurried over, and
Pasquale explained to him calmly not to worry, he had just made clear to his
employee a thing that wasn’t clear to him, there would be no more problems.
We ended up eating the pizza in silence, eyes lowered, in slow bites, as if it
were poisoned. And when we left Rino gave Lila a good lecture that ended with
a threat: Go on like that and I’m not taking you anywhere.
What had happened? On the street the men looked at all of us, pretty, less
pretty, ugly, and not so much the youths as the grown men. It was like that in
the  neighborhood  and  outside  of  it,  and  Ada,  Carmela,  I  myself—especially
after  the  incident  with  the  Solaras—had  learned  instinctively  to  lower  our
eyes, pretend not to hear the obscenities they directed at us, and keep going.
Lila no. To go out with her on Sunday became a permanent point of tension. If
someone looked at her she returned the look. If someone said something to
her, she stopped, bewildered, as if she couldn’t believe he was talking to her,
and  sometimes  she  responded,  curious.  Especially  since—something  very
unusual—men almost never addressed to her the obscenities that they almost
always had for us.
One afternoon at the end of August we went as far as the Villa Comunale
park,  and  sat  down  in  a  café  there,  because  Pasquale,  acting  the  grandee,
wanted to buy everyone a spumone. At a table across from us was a family
eating ice cream, like us: father, mother, and three boys between twelve and
seven. They seemed respectable people: the father, a large man, in his fifties,
had a professorial look. And I can swear that Lila wasn’t showing off in any
way: she wasn’t wearing lipstick, she had on the usual shabby dress that her
mother had made—the rest of us were showing off more, Carmela especially.
But that man—this time we all realized it—couldn’t take his eyes off her, and
Lila,  although  she  tried  to  control  herself,  responded  to  his  gaze  as  if  she
couldn’t get over being so admired. Finally, while at our table the discomfort of
Rino, of Pasquale, of Antonio increased, the man, evidently unaware of the risk
he ran, rose, stood in front of Lila, and, addressing the boys politely, said:
“You are fortunate: you have here a girl who will become more beautiful
than a Botticelli Venus. I beg your pardon, but I said it to my wife and sons, and
I felt the need to tell you as well.”
Lila burst out laughing because of the strain. The man smiled in turn, and,
with a small bow, was about to return to his table when Rino grabbed him by
the collar, forced him to retrace his steps quickly, sat him down hard, and, in
front of his wife and children, unloaded a series of insults of the sort we said in
the  neighborhood.  Then  the  man  got  angry,  the  wife,  yelling,  intervened,
Antonio pulled Rino away. Another Sunday ruined.
But the worst was a time when Rino wasn’t there. What struck me was not
the fact in itself but the consolidation around Lila of hostilities from different
places. Gigliola’s mother gave a party for her name day (her name was Rosa, if I
remember right), and invited people of all ages. Since her husband was the
baker at the Solara pastry shop, things were done on a grand scale: there was
an abundance of cream puffs, pastries with cassata filling, sfogliatelle, almond
pastries, liqueurs, soft drinks, and dance records, from the most ordinary to
the latest fashion. People came who would never come to our kids’ parties. For
example the pharmacist and his wife and their oldest son, Gino, who was going
to  high  school,  like  me.  For  example  Maestro  Ferraro  and  his  whole  large
family. For example Maria, the widow of Don Achille, and her son Alfonso and
daughter Pinuccia, in a bright-colored dress, and even Stefano.
That family at first caused some unease: Pasquale and Carmela Peluso, the
children  of  the  murderer  of  Don  Achille,  were  also  at  the  party.  But  then
everything arranged itself for the best. Alfonso was a nice boy (he, too, was
going to high school, the same one as me), and he even exchanged a few words
with Carmela; Pinuccia was just pleased to be at a party, working, as she did, in
the  store  every  day;  Stefano,  having  precociously  understood  that  good
business is based on the absence of exclusiveness, considered all the residents
of the neighborhood potential clients who would spend their money in his
store; he produced his lovely, gentle smile for everyone, and so was able to
avoid, even for an instant, meeting Pasquale’s gaze; and, finally, Maria, who
usually turned the other way if she saw Signora Peluso, completely ignored the
two children and talked for a long time to Gigliola’s mother. And then, as some
people started dancing, and the din increased, there was a release of tension,
and no one paid attention to anything.
First came the traditional dances, and then we moved on to a new kind of
dance, rock and roll, which everyone, old and young, was curious about. I was
hot and had retreated to a corner. I knew how to dance rock and roll, of course,
I had often done it at home with my brother Peppe, and at Lila’s, on Sundays,
with her, but I felt too awkward for those jerky, agile moves, and, I decided,
though reluctantly, just to watch. Nor did Lila seem particularly good at it: her
movements looked silly, and I had even said that to her, and she had taken the
criticism as a challenge and persisted in practicing on her own, since even Rino
refused to try. But, perfectionist as she was in all things, that night she, too,
decided,  to  my  satisfaction,  to  stand  aside  with  me  and  watch  how  well
Pasquale and Carmela Peluso danced.
At some point, however, Enzo approached. The child who had thrown stones
at us, who had surprisingly competed with Lila in arithmetic, who had once
given her a wreath of sorb apples, over the years had been as if sucked up into
a short but powerful organism, used to hard work. He looked older even than
Rino, who among us was the oldest. You could see in every feature that he rose
before dawn, that he had to deal with the Camorra at the fruit-and-vegetable
market,  that  he  went  in  all  seasons,  in  cold,  in  the  rain,  to  sell  fruit  and
vegetables from his cart, up and down the streets of the neighborhood. Yet in
his fair-skinned face, with its blond eyebrows and lashes, in the blue eyes,
there was still something of the rebellious child we had known. Enzo spoke
rarely but confidently, always in dialect, and it would not have occurred to
either of us to joke with him, or even to make conversation. It was he who took
the initiative. He asked Lila why she wasn’t dancing. She answered: because I
don’t really know how to do this dance. He was silent for a while, then he said,
I don’t, either. But when another rock-and-roll song was put on he took her by
the arm in a natural way and pushed her into the middle of the room. Lila, who
if one simply grazed her without her permission leaped up as if she had been
stung by a wasp, didn’t react, so great, evidently, was her desire to dance.
Rather, she looked at him gratefully and abandoned herself to the music.
It was immediately clear that Enzo didn’t know much about it. He moved
very little, in a serious, composed way, but he was very attentive to Lila, he
obviously wished to do her a favor, let her show off. And although she wasn’t
as good as Carmen, she managed as usual to win everyone’s attention. Even
Enzo  likes  her,  I  said  to  myself  in  desolation.  And—I  realized  right  away—
Stefano, the grocer: he gazed at her the whole time the way one gazes at a
movie star.
But while Lila was dancing the Solara brothers arrived.
The mere sight of them agitated me. They greeted the pastry maker and his
wife, they gave Stefano a pat of sympathy, and then they, too, started watching
the dancers. First, like masters of the neighborhood, as they felt they were,
they looked in a vulgar fashion at Ada, who avoided their gaze; then they spoke
to  each  other  and,  indicating  Antonio,  gave  him  an  exaggerated  nod  of
greeting, which he pretended not to see; finally they noticed Lila, stared at her
for a long time, then whispered to each other, Michele giving an obvious sign
of assent.
I didn’t let them out of my sight, and I quickly realized that in particular
Marcello—Marcello, whom all the girls liked—didn’t seem in the least angered
by the knife business. On the contrary. In a few seconds he was completely
captivated by Lila’s lithe and elegant body, by her face, which was unusual in
the neighborhood and perhaps in the whole city of Naples. He gazed without
ever taking his eyes off her, as if he had lost the little brain he had. He gazed at
her even when the music stopped.
It was an instant. Enzo made as if to push Lila into the corner where I was,
Stefano  and  Marcello  moved  together  to  ask  her  to  dance;  but  Pasquale
preceded  them.  Lila  made  a  gracious  skip  of  consent,  clapped  her  hands
happily. At the same moment, four males, of various ages, each convinced in a
different way of his own absolute power, reached out toward the figure of a
fourteen-year-old girl. The needle scratched on the record, the music started.
Stefano, Marcello, Enzo retreated uncertainly. Pasquale began to dance with
Lila, and, given his virtuosity, she immediately let go.
At that point Michele Solara, perhaps out of love for his brother, perhaps out
of a pure taste for making trouble, decided to complicate the situation in his
own way. He nudged Stefano with his elbow and said aloud, “Are you some
kind of a sissy? That’s the son of the man who killed your father, he’s a lousy
Communist, and you stand there watching him dance with the girl you wanted
to dance with?”
Pasquale certainly didn’t hear him, because the music was loud and he was
busy performing acrobatics with Lila. But I heard, and Enzo next to me heard,
and naturally Stefano heard. We waited for something to happen but nothing
happened. Stefano was someone who knew his own business. The grocery was
thriving, he was planning to buy a neighboring space to expand it, he felt, in
short,  fortunate,  and  in  fact  he  was  very  sure  that  life  would  give  him
everything he wanted. He said to Michele with his enchanting smile, “Let him
dance, he’s a good dancer.” And he continued to watch Lila as if the only thing
that mattered to him at that moment were her. Michele made a grimace of
disgust and went to look for the pastry maker and his wife.
What did he want to do now? I saw him talking with the hosts in an agitated
manner, he pointed to Maria in one corner, he pointed to Stefano and Alfonso
and Pinuccia, he pointed to Pasquale, who was dancing, he pointed to Carmela,
who was showing off with Antonio. As soon as the music stopped Gigliola’s
mother took Pasquale under the arm in a friendly way, led him into a corner,
said something in his ear.
“Go ahead,” Michele said to his brother, “the way’s clear.” And Marcello
Solara tried again with Lila.
I was sure she would say no, I knew how she detested him. But that wasn’t
what happened. The music started, and she, with the desire to dance in every
muscle,  first  looked  for  Pasquale,  then,  not  seeing  him,  grasped  Marcello’s
hand as if it were merely a hand, as if beyond it there were not an arm, his
whole body, and, all sweaty, began again to do what at that moment counted
most for her: dance.
I looked at Stefano, I looked at Enzo. Everything was charged with tension.
My heart was pounding as Pasquale, scowling, went over to Carmela and spoke
sharply to her. Carmela protested in a low voice, in a low voice he silenced her.
Antonio approached them, spoke to Pasquale. Together they glared at Michele
Solara, who was again talking to Stefano, at Marcello, who was dancing with
Lila, pulling her, lifting her, lowering her down. Then Antonio went to drag
Ada out of the dancing. The music stopped, Lila returned to my side. I said to
her, “Something’s happening, we have to go.”
She laughed, exclaimed, “Even if there’s an earthquake coming I’m going to
have another dance,” and she looked at Enzo, who was leaning against a wall.
But meanwhile Marcello asked and she let him draw her again into a dance.
Pasquale came over and said somberly that we had to go.
“Let’s wait till Lila finishes her dance.”
“No, right now,” he said in a tone that would not admit a response, hard,
rude. Then he went straight toward Michele Solara and bumped him hard with
one shoulder. Michele laughed, said something obscene out of the corner of his
mouth. Pasquale continued toward the door, followed by Carmela, reluctantly,
and by Antonio, who had Ada with him.
I turned to see what Enzo was doing, but he was still leaning against the wall,
watching Lila dance. The music ended. Lila moved toward me, followed by
Marcello, whose eyes were shining with happiness.
“We have to go,” I nearly shrieked.
I must have put such anguish into my voice that she finally looked around as
if she had woken up. “All right, let’s go,” she said, puzzled.
I headed toward the door, without waiting any longer, the music started
again. Marcello Solara grabbed Lila by the arm, said to her between a laugh and
an entreaty: “Stay, I’ll take you home.”
Lila, as if only then recognizing him, looked at him incredulously: suddenly
it seemed to her impossible that he was touching her with such assurance. She
tried to free her arm but Marcello held it in a strong grip, saying, “Just one
more dance.”
Enzo left the wall, grabbed Marcello’s wrist without saying a word. I see him
before my eyes: he was calm; although younger in years and smaller in size, he
seemed to be making no effort. The strength of his grip could be seen only on
the face of Marcello Solara, who let go of Lila with a grimace of pain and seized
his wrist with his other hand. As we left I heard Lila saying indignantly to Enzo,
in the thickest dialect, “He touched me, did you see: me, that shit. Luckily Rino
wasn’t there. If he does it again, he’s dead.”
Was it possible she didn’t realize that she had danced with Marcello twice?
Yes, possible, she was like that.
Outside we found Pasquale, Antonio, Carmela, and Ada. Pasquale was beside
himself, we had never seen him like that. He was shouting insults, shouting at
the top of his lungs, his eyes like a madman’s, and there was no way to calm
him. He was angry with Michele, of course, but above all with Marcello and
Stefano. He said things that we weren’t capable of understanding. He said that
the Bar Solara had always been a place for loan sharks from the Camorra, that
it was the base for smuggling and for collecting votes for the monarchists. He
said that Don Achille had been a spy for the Nazi Fascists, he said that the
money Stefano was using to expand the grocery store his father had made on
the  black  market.  He  yelled,  “Papa  was  right  to  kill  him.”  He  yelled,  “The
Solaras, father and sons—I’ll cut their throats, and then I’ll eliminate Stefano
and his whole family from the face of the earth.” Finally, turning to Lila, he
yelled, as if it were the most serious thing, “And you, you were even dancing
with that piece of shit.”
At  that  point,  as  if  Pasquale’s  rage  had  pumped  breath  into  his  chest,
Antonio, too, began shouting, and it was almost as if he were angry at Pasquale
because he wished to deprive him of a joy: the joy of killing the Solaras for
what they had done to Ada. And Ada immediately began to cry and Carmela
couldn’t  restrain  herself  and  she,  too,  burst  into  tears.  And  Enzo  tried  to
persuade all of us to get off the street. “Let’s go home,” he said. But Pasquale
and  Antonio  silenced  him,  they  wanted  to  stay  and  confront  the  Solaras.
Fiercely, but with pretended calm, they kept repeating to Enzo, “Go, go, we’ll
see you tomorrow.” Enzo said softly, “If you stay, I’m going to stay, too.” At
that point I, too, burst into tears and a moment afterward—the thing that
moved me most—Lila, whom I had never seen cry, ever, began weeping.
We were four girls in tears, desperate tears. But Pasquale yielded only when
he saw Lila crying. He said in a tone of resignation, “All right, not tonight, I’ll
settle things with the Solaras some other time, let’s go.” Immediately, between
sobs, Lila and I took him under the arm, dragged him away. For a moment we
consoled him by saying mean things about the Solaras, but also insisting that
the best thing was to act as if they didn’t exist. Then Lila, drying her tears with
the back of her hand, asked “Who are the Nazi Fascists, Pascà? Who are the
monarchists? What’s the black market?”
17.
It’s hard to say what Pasquale’s answers did to Lila. I’m in danger of getting
it wrong, partly because on me, at the time, they had no concrete effect. But
she, in her usual way, was moved and altered by them, so that for the entire
summer she tormented me with a single concept that I found quite unbearable.
I’ll try to summarize it, using the language of today, like this: there are no
gestures, words, or sighs that do not contain the sum of all the crimes that
human beings have committed and commit.
Naturally  she  said  it  in  another  way.  But  what  matters  is  that  she  was
gripped  by  a  frenzy  of  absolute  disclosure.  She  pointed  to  people,  things,
streets, and said, “That man fought in the war and killed, that one bludgeoned
and administered castor oil, that one turned in a lot of people, that one starved
his own mother, in that house they tortured and killed, on these stones they
marched and gave the Fascist salute, on this corner they inflicted beatings,
these people’s money comes from the hunger of others, this car was bought by
selling  bread  adulterated  with  marble  dust  and  rotten  meat  on  the  black
market,  that  butcher  shop  had  its  origins  in  stolen  copper  and  vandalized
freight trains, behind that bar is the Camorra, smuggling, loan-sharking.”
Soon she became dissatisfied with Pasquale. It was as if he had set in motion
a mechanism in her head and now her job was to put order into a chaotic mass
of impressions. Increasingly intent, increasingly obsessed, probably overcome
herself  by  an  urgent  need  to  find  a  solid  vision,  without  cracks,  she
complicated his meager information with some book she got from the library.
So  she  gave  concrete  motives,  ordinary  faces  to  the  air  of  abstract
apprehension that as children we had breathed in the neighborhood. Fascism,
Nazism, the war, the Allies, the monarchy, the republic—she turned them into
streets, houses, faces, Don Achille and the black market, Alfredo Peluso the
Communist,  the  Camorrist  grandfather  of  the  Solaras,  the  father,  Silvio,  a
worse  Fascist  than  Marcello  and  Michele,  and  her  father,  Fernando  the
shoemaker,  and  my  father,  all—all—in  her  eyes  stained  to  the  marrow  by
shadowy crimes, all hardened criminals or acquiescent accomplices, all bought
for practically nothing. She and Pasquale enclosed me in a terrible world that
left no escape.
Then Pasquale himself began to be silent, defeated by Lila’s capacity to link
one thing to another in a chain that tightened around you on all sides. I often
looked at them walking together and, if at first it had been she who hung on
his words, now it was he who hung on hers. He’s in love, I thought. I also
thought: Lila will fall in love, too, they’ll be engaged, they’ll marry, they’ll
always be talking about these political things, they’ll have children who will
talk about the same things. When school started again, on the one hand I
suffered because I knew I wouldn’t have time for Lila anymore, on the other I
hoped to detach myself from that sum of the misdeeds and compliances and
cowardly acts of the people we knew, whom we loved, whom we carried—she,
Pasquale, Rino, I, all of us—in our blood.
18.
The first two years of high school were much more difficult than middle
school. I was in a class of forty-two students, one of the very rare mixed classes
in that school. There were few girls, and I didn’t know any of them. Gigliola,
after much boasting (“Yes, I’m going to high school, too, definitely, we’ll sit at
the same desk”), ended up going to help her father in the Solaras’ pastry shop.
Of the boys, instead, I knew Alfonso and Gino, who, however, sat together in
one  of  the  front  desks,  elbow  to  elbow,  with  frightened  looks,  and  nearly
pretended not to know me. The room stank, an acid odor of sweat, dirty feet,
fear.
For the first months I lived my new scholastic life in silence, constantly
picking at my acne-studded forehead and cheeks. Sitting in one of the rows at
the back, from which I could barely see the teachers or what they wrote on the
blackboard, I was unknown to my deskmate as she was unknown to me. Thanks
to Maestra Oliviero I soon had the books I needed; they were grimy and well
worn. I imposed on myself a discipline learned in middle school: I studied all
afternoon until eleven and then from five in the morning until seven, when it
was time to go. Leaving the house, weighed down with books, I often met Lila,
who was hurrying to the shoe shop to open up, sweep, wash, get things in
order  before  her  father  and  brother  arrived.  She  questioned  me  about  the
subjects I had for the day, what I had studied, and wanted precise answers. If I
didn’t give them she besieged me with questions that made me fear I hadn’t
studied enough, that I wouldn’t be able to answer the teachers as I wasn’t able
to answer her. On some cold mornings, when I rose at dawn and in the kitchen
went over the lessons, I had the impression that, as usual, I was sacrificing the
warm deep sleep of the morning to make a good impression on the daughter of
the  shoemaker  rather  than  on  the  teachers  in  the  school  for  rich  people.
Breakfast was hurried, too, for her sake. I gulped down milk and coffee and ran
out to the street so as not to miss even a step of the way we would go together.
I waited at the entrance. I saw her arriving from her building and noticed
that she was continuing to change. She was now taller than I was. She walked
not like the bony child she had been until a few months before but as if, as her
body rounded, her pace had also become softer. Hi, hi, we immediately started
talking. When we stopped at the intersection and said goodbye, she going to
the shop, I to the metro station, I kept turning to give her a last glance. Once or
twice I saw Pasquale arrive out of breath and walk beside her, keeping her
company.
The metro was crowded with boys and girls stained with sleep, with the
smoke of the first cigarettes. I didn’t smoke, I didn’t talk to anyone. During the
few minutes of the journey I went over my lessons again, in panic, frantically
pasting strange languages into my head, tones different from those used in the
neighborhood. I was terrified of failing in school, of the crooked shadow of my
displeased mother, of the glares of Maestra Oliviero. And yet I had now a single
true thought: to find a boyfriend, immediately, before Lila announced to me
that she was going with Pasquale.
Every day I felt more strongly the anguish of not being in time. I was afraid,
coming home from school, of meeting her and learning from her melodious
voice that now she was making love with Peluso. Or if it wasn’t him, it was
Enzo. Or if it wasn’t Enzo, it was Antonio. Or, what do I know, Stefano Carracci,
the grocer, or even Marcello Solara: Lila was unpredictable. The males who
buzzed around her were almost men, full of demands. As a result, between the
plan for the shoes, reading about the terrible world we had been born into, and
boyfriends, she would no longer have time for me. Sometimes, on the way
home from school, I made a wide circle in order not to pass the shoemaker’s
shop. If instead I saw her in person, from a distance, in distress I would change
my route. But then I couldn’t resist and went to meet her as if it were fated.
Entering  and  leaving  the  school,  an  enormous  gloomy,  run-down  gray
building, I looked at the boys. I looked at them insistently, so that they would
feel my gaze on them and look at me. I looked at my classmates, some still in
short pants, others in knickers or long pants. I looked at the older boys, in the
upper classes, who mostly wore jacket and tie, though never an overcoat, they
had to prove, especially to themselves, that they didn’t suffer from the cold:
hair in crew cuts, their necks white because of the high tapering. I preferred
them, but I would have been content even with one from the class above mine,
the main thing was that he should wear long pants.
One day I was struck by a student with a shambling gait, who was very thin,
with  disheveled  brown  hair  and  a  face  that  seemed  to  me  handsome  and
somehow familiar. How old could he be: sixteen? Seventeen? I observed him
carefully, looked again, and my heart stopped: it was Nino Sarratore, the son of
Donato  Sarratore,  the  railroad  worker  poet.  He  returned  my  look,  but
distractedly, he didn’t recognize me. His jacket was shapeless at the elbows,
tight at the shoulders, his pants were threadbare, his shoes lumpy. He showed
no sign of prosperity, such as Stefano and, especially, the Solaras displayed.
Evidently his father, although he had written a book of poems, was not yet
wealthy.
I  was  disturbed  by  that  unexpected  apparition.  As  I  left  I  had  a  violent
impulse to tell Lila right away, but then I changed my mind. If I told her, surely
she would ask to go to school with me to see him. And I knew already what
would happen. As Nino hadn’t noticed me, as he hadn’t recognized the slender
blond child of elementary school in the fat and pimply fourteen-year-old I had
become, so he would immediately recognize Lila and be vanquished. I decided
to cultivate the image of Nino Sarratore in silence, as he left school with his
head bent and his rocking gait and went off along Corso Garibaldi. Now I went
to school as if to see him, even just a glimpse, were the only real reason to go.
The autumn flew by. One morning I was questioned on the Aeneid: it was the
first time I had been called to the front of the room. The teacher, an indolent
man in his sixties named Gerace, who was always yawning noisily, burst out
laughing when I said “or-A-cle” instead of “OR-a-cle.” It didn’t occur to him
that, although I knew the meaning of the word, I lived in a world where no one
had ever had any reason to use it. The others laughed, too, especially Gino,
sitting at the front desk with Alfonso. I felt humiliated. Days passed, and we
had our first homework in Latin. When Gerace brought back the corrected
homework he said, “Who is Greco?”
I raised my hand.
“Come here.”
He asked me a series of questions on declensions, verbs, syntax. I answered
fearfully, especially because he looked at me with an interest that until that
moment he hadn’t shown in any of us. Then he gave me the paper without any
comment. I had got a nine.
It was the start of a crescendo. He gave me eight in the Italian homework, in
history  I  didn’t  miss  a  date,  in  geography  I  knew  perfectly  land  areas,
populations, mineral wealth, agriculture. But in Greek in particular I amazed
him. Thanks to what I had learned with Lila, I displayed a knowledge of the
alphabet, a skill in reading, a confidence in pronouncing the sounds that finally
wrung  public  praise  from  the  teacher.  My  cleverness  reached  the  other
teachers like a dogma. Even the religion teacher took me aside one morning
and asked if I wanted to enroll in a free correspondence course in theology. I
said yes. By Christmas people were calling me Greco, some Elena. Gino began to
linger on the way out, to wait for me so we could go back to the neighborhood
together. One day suddenly he asked me again if I would be his girlfriend, and
I, although he was an idiot, drew a sigh of relief: better than nothing. I agreed.
All that exhilarating intensity had a break during the Christmas vacation. I
was reabsorbed by the neighborhood, I had more time, I saw Lila more often.
She had discovered that I was learning English and naturally she had got a
grammar book. Now she knew a lot of words, which she pronounced very
approximately,  and  of  course  my  pronunciation  was  just  as  bad.  But  she
pestered me, she said: when you go back to school ask the teacher how to
pronounce this, how to pronounce that. One day she brought me into the shop,
showed me a metal box full of pieces of paper: on one side of each she had
written an Italian word, on the other the English equivalent: matita/pencil,
capire/to understand, scarpa/shoe. It was Maestro Ferraro who had advised her
to do this, as an useful way of learning vocabulary. She read me the Italian, she
wanted  me  to  say  the  corresponding  word  in  English.  But  I  knew  little  or
nothing. She seemed ahead of me in everything, as if she were going to a secret
school. I noticed also a tension in her, the desire to prove that she was equal to
whatever I was studying. I would have preferred to talk about other things,
instead she questioned me about the Greek declensions, and deduced that I had
stopped at the first while she had already studied the third. She also asked me
about the Aeneid, she was crazy about it. She had read it all in a few days, while
I, in school, was in the middle of the second book. She talked in great detail
about Dido, a figure I knew nothing about, I heard that name for the first time
not at school but from her. And one afternoon she made an observation that
impressed me deeply. She said, “When there is no love, not only the life of the
people becomes sterile but the life of cities.” I don’t remember exactly how she
expressed it, but that was the idea, and I associated it with our dirty streets,
the dusty gardens, the countryside disfigured by new buildings, the violence in
every house, every family. I was afraid that she would start talking again about
Fascism,  Nazism,  Communism.  And  I  couldn’t  help  it,  I  wanted  her  to
understand  that  good  things  were  happening  to  me,  first  that  I  was  the
girlfriend of Gino, and second that Nino Sarratore came to my school, more
handsome than he had been in elementary school.
She narrowed her eyes, I was afraid she was about to tell me: I also have a
boyfriend. Instead, she began to tease me. “You go out with the son of the
pharmacist,”  she  said.  “Good  for  you,  you’ve  given  in,  you’re  in  love  like
Aeneas’  lover.”  Then  she  jumped  abruptly  from  Dido  to  Melina  and  talked
about her for a long time, since I knew little or nothing of what was happening
in the buildings—I went to school in the morning and studied until late at
night. She talked about her relative as if she never let her out of her sight.
Poverty was consuming her and her children and so she continued to wash the
stairs of the buildings, together with Ada (the money Antonio brought home
wasn’t enough). But one never heard her singing anymore, the euphoria had
passed, now she slaved away mechanically. Lila described Melina in minute
detail: bent double, she started from the top floor and, with the wet rag in her
hands, wiped step after step, flight after flight, with an energy and an agitation
that would have exhausted a more robust person. If someone went down or up,
she began shouting insults, she hurled the rag at him. Ada had said that once
she had seen her mother, in the midst of a crisis because someone had spoiled
her work by walking on it, drink the dirty water from the bucket, and had had
to tear it away from her. Did I understand? Step by step, starting with Gino she
had ended in Dido, in Aeneas who abandoned her, in the mad widow. And only
at that point did she bring in Nino Sarratore, proof that she had listened to me
carefully. “Tell him about Melina,” she urged me, “tell him he should tell his
father.” Then she added, maliciously, “Because it’s all too easy to write poems.”
And finally she started laughing and promised with a certain solemnity, “I’m
never going to fall in love with anyone and I will never ever ever write a
poem.”
“I don’t believe it.”
“It’s true.”
“But people will fall in love with you.”
“Worse for them.”
“They’ll suffer like that Dido.”
“No,  they’ll  go  and  find  someone  else,  just  like  Aeneas,  who  eventually
settled down with the daughter of a king.”
I wasn’t convinced. I went away and came back, I liked those conversations
about boyfriends, now that I had one. Once I asked her, cautiously, “What’s
Marcello Solara up to, is he still after you?”
“Yes.”
“And you?”
She made a half smile of contempt that meant: Marcello Solara makes me
sick.
“And Enzo?”
“We’re friends.”
“And Stefano?”
“According to you they’re all thinking about me?”
“Yes.”
“Stefano serves me first if there’s a crowd.”
“You see?”
“There’s nothing to see.”
“And Pasquale, has he said anything to you?”
“Are you mad?”
“I’ve seen him walking you to the shop in the morning.”
“Because he’s explaining the things that happened before us.”
Thus she returned to the theme of “before,” but in a different way than she
had at first. She said that we didn’t know anything, either as children or now,
that  we  were  therefore  not  in  a  position  to  understand  anything,  that
everything in the neighborhood, every stone or piece of wood, everything,
anything you could name, was already there before us, but we had grown up
without realizing it, without ever even thinking about it. Not just us. Her father
pretended that there had been nothing before. Her mother did the same, my
mother, my father, even Rino. And yet Stefano’s grocery store before had been
the carpenter shop of Alfredo Peluso, Pasquale’s father. And yet Don Achille’s
money had been made before. And the Solaras’ money as well. She had tested
this out on her father and mother. They didn’t know anything, they wouldn’t
talk about anything. Not Fascism, not the king. No injustice, no oppression, no
exploitation. They hated Don Achille and were afraid of the Solaras. But they
overlooked it and went to spend their money both at Don Achille’s son’s and at
the  Solaras’,  and  sent  us,  too.  And  they  voted  for  the  Fascists,  for  the
monarchists, as the Solaras wanted them to. And they thought that what had
happened before was past and, in order to live quietly, they placed a stone on
top of it, and so, without knowing it, they continued it, they were immersed in
the things of before, and we kept them inside us, too. That conversation about
“before” made a stronger impression than the vague conversations she had
drawn me into during the summer. The Christmas vacation passed in deep
conversation—in the shoemaker’s shop, on the street, in the courtyard. We
told each other everything, even the little things, and were happy.
19.
During that period I felt strong. At school I acquitted myself perfectly, I told
Maestra Oliviero about my successes and she praised me. I saw Gino, and every
day we walked to the Bar Solara: he bought a pastry, we shared it, we went
home. Sometimes I even had the impression that it was Lila who depended on
me and not I on her. I had crossed the boundaries of the neighborhood, I went
to the high school, I was with boys and girls who were studying Latin and
Greek, and not, like her, with construction workers, mechanics, cobblers, fruit
and vegetable sellers, grocers, shoemakers. When she talked to me about Dido
or her method for learning English words or the third declension or what she
pondered when she talked to Pasquale, I saw with increasing clarity that it
made her somewhat uneasy, as if it were ultimately she who felt the need to
continuously prove that she could talk to me as an equal. Even when, one
afternoon, with some uncertainty, she decided to show me how far she and
Rino were with the secret shoe they were making, I no longer felt that she
inhabited a marvelous land without me. It seemed instead that both she and
her brother hesitated to talk to me about things of such small value.
Or maybe it was only that I was beginning to feel superior. When they dug
around in a storeroom and took out the box, I encouraged them artificially. But
the pair of men’s shoes they showed me seemed truly unusual; they were size
43, the size of Rino and Fernando, brown, and just as I remembered them in
one of Lila’s drawings: they seemed both light and strong. I had never seen
anything like them on the feet of anyone. While Lila and Rino let me touch
them and demonstrated their qualities, I praised them enthusiastically. “Touch
here,” Rino said, excited by my praise, “and tell me if you feel the stitches.”
“No,” I said, “you can’t feel them.” Then he took the shoes out of my hands,
bent them, widened them, showed me their durability. I approved, I said bravo
the way Maestra Oliviero did when she wanted to encourage us. But Lila didn’t
seem satisfied. The more good qualities her brother listed, the more defects
she showed me and said to Rino, “How long would it take Papa to see these
mistakes?” At one point she said, seriously, “Let’s test with water again.” Her
brother seemed opposed. She filled a basin anyway, put her hand in one of the
shoes as if it were a foot, and walked it in the water a little. “She has to play,”
Rino said, like a big brother who is annoyed by the childish acts of his little
sister.
But as soon as he saw Lila take out the shoe he became preoccupied and
asked, “So?”
Lila took out her hand, rubbed her fingers, held it out to him.
“Touch.”
Rino put his hand in, said, “It’s dry.”
“It’s wet.”
“Only you feel the wetness. Touch it, Lenù.”
I touched it.
“It’s a little damp,” I said.
Lila was displeased.
“See? You hold it in the water for a minute and it’s already wet, it’s no good.
We have to unglue it and unstitch it all again.”
“What the fuck if there’s a little dampness?”
Rino got angry. Not only that: right before my eyes, he went through a kind
of transformation. He became red in the face, he swelled up around the eyes
and cheekbones, he couldn’t contain himself and exploded in a series of curses
and expletives against his sister. He complained that if they went on like that
they would never finish. He reproached Lila because she first encouraged him
and then discouraged him. He shouted that he wouldn’t stay forever in that
wretched place to be his father’s servant and watch others get rich. He grabbed
the iron foot, pretended to throw it at her, and if he really had he would have
killed her.
I left, on the one hand confused by that rage in a youth who was usually kind
and on the other proud of how authoritative, how definitive my opinion had
been.
In the following days I found that my acne was drying up.
“You’re really doing well, it’s the satisfaction you get from school, it’s love,”
Lila said to me, and I felt that she was a little sad.
20.
As the New Year’s Eve celebration approached, Rino was seized by the desire
to set off more fireworks than anyone else, especially the Solaras. Lila made
fun of him, but sometimes she became harsh with him. She told me that her
brother, who at first had been skeptical about the possibility of making money
with the shoes, had now begun to count on it too heavily, already he saw
himself as the owner of the Cerullo shoe factory and didn’t want to go back to
repairing shoes. This worried her, it was a side of Rino she didn’t know. He had
always seemed to her only generously impetuous, sometimes aggressive, but
not a braggart. Now, though, he posed as what he was not. He felt he was close
to wealth. A boss. Someone who could give the neighborhood the first sign of
the good fortune the new year would bring by setting off a lot of fireworks,
more than the Solara brothers, who had become in his eyes the model of the
young man to emulate and indeed to surpass, people whom he envied and
considered enemies to be beaten, so that he could assume their role.
Lila never said, as she had with Carmela and the other girls in the courtyard:
maybe I planted a fantasy in his head that he doesn’t know how to control. She
herself believed in the fantasy, felt it could be realized, and her brother was an
important element of that realization. And then she loved him, he was six
years older, she didn’t want to reduce him to a child who can’t handle his
dreams. But she often said that Rino lacked concreteness, he didn’t know how
to confront difficulties with his feet on the ground, he tended to get carried
away. Like that competition with the Solaras, for example.
“Maybe he’s jealous of Marcello,” I said once.
“What?”
She  smiled,  pretending  not  to  understand,  but  she  had  told  me  herself.
Marcello Solara passed by and hung around in front of the shoemaker’s shop
every day, both on foot and in the 1100, and Rino must have been aware of it,
since he had said many times to his sister, “Don’t you dare get too familiar with
that shit.” Maybe, who knows, since he wasn’t able to beat up the Solaras for
chasing after his sister, he wished to demonstrate his strength by means of
fireworks.
“If that’s true, you’ll agree that I’m right?”
“Right about what?”
“That he’s acting like a big shot: where’s he going to get the money for the
fireworks?”
It  was  true.  The  last  night  of  the  year  was  a  night  of  battle,  in  the
neighborhood and throughout Naples. Dazzling lights, explosions. The dense
smoke  from  the  gunpowder  made  everything  hazy,  it  entered  the  houses,
burned your eyes, made you cough. But the pop of the poppers, the hiss of the
rockets, the cannonades of the missiles had a cost and as usual those who set
off the most were those with the most money. We Grecos had no money, at my
house the contribution to the end-of-the-year fireworks was small. My father
bought  a  box  of  sparklers,  one  of  wheels,  and  one  of  slender  rockets.  At
midnight he put in my hand, since I was the oldest, the stem of a sparkler or of
a Catherine wheel, and lighted it, and I stood motionless, excited and terrified,
staring at the whirling sparks, the brief swirls of fire a short distance from my
fingers. He then stuck the shafts of the rockets in glass bottles on the marble
windowsill,  burned  the  fuses  with  the  tip  of  his  cigarette,  and,  excitedly,
launched the luminous whistles into the sky. Then he threw the bottles, too,
into the street.
Similarly at Lila’s house they set off just a few or none, and Rino rebelled.
From the age of twelve he had gotten into the habit of going out to celebrate
midnight  with  people  more  daring  than  his  father,  and  his  exploits  in
recovering  unexploded  bottles  were  famous—as  soon  as  the  chaos  of  the
celebration was over he would go in search of them. He would assemble them
all near the ponds, light them, and delight in the high flare, trac trac trac, the
final explosion. He still had a dark scar on one hand, a broad stain, from a time
when he hadn’t pulled back fast enough.
Among the many reasons, open and secret, for that challenge at the end of
1958, it should therefore be added that maybe Rino wanted to make up for his
impoverished childhood. So he got busy collecting money here and there to
buy fireworks. But we knew—he knew himself, despite the frenzy for grandeur
that had seized him—that there was no way to compete with the Solaras. As
they did every year, the two brothers went back and forth for days in their
1100, the trunk loaded with explosives that on New Year’s Eve would kill birds,
frighten dogs, cats, mice, make the buildings quake from the cellars up to the
roofs. Rino observed them from the shop with resentment and meanwhile was
dealing with Pasquale, with Antonio, and above all with Enzo, who had a little
more money, to procure an arsenal that would at least make for a good show.
Things took a small, unexpected turn when Lila and I were sent to Stefano
Carracci’s grocery by our mothers to do the shopping for the dinner. The shop
was full of people. Behind the counter, besides Stefano and Pinuccia, Alfonso
was  serving  customers,  and  he  gave  us  an  embarrassed  smile.  We  settled
ourselves for a long wait. But Stefano addressed to me, unequivocally to me, a
nod of greeting, and said something in his brother’s ear. My classmate came
out from behind the counter and asked if we had a list. We gave him our lists
and he slipped away. In five minutes our groceries were ready.
We put everything in our bags, paid Signora Maria, and went out. But we
hadn’t gone far when not Alfonso but Stefano, Stefano himself, called to me
with his lovely man’s voice, “Lenù.”
He joined us. He had a confident expression, a friendly smile. Only his white
grease-stained apron spoiled him slightly. He spoke to both of us, in dialect,
but looking at me: “Would you like to come and celebrate the new year at my
house? Alfonso would really be pleased.”
The wife and children of Don Achille, even after the murder of the father, led
a very retiring life: church, grocery, home, at most some small celebration they
couldn’t skip. That invitation was something new. I answered, nodding at Lila:
“We’re already busy, we’ll be with her brother and some friends.”
“Tell Rino, too, tell your parents: the house is big and we’ll go out on the
terrace for the fireworks.”
Lila interjected in a dismissive tone: “Pasquale and Carmen Peluso and their
mother are coming to celebrate with us.”
It was supposed to be a phrase that eliminated any further talk: Alfredo
Peluso was at Poggioreale because he had murdered Don Achille, and the son of
Don Achille could not invite the children of Alfredo to toast the new year at his
house. Instead, Stefano looked at her, very intensely, as if until that moment he
hadn’t seen her, and said, in the tone one uses when something is obvious: “All
right, all of you come: we’ll drink spumante, dance—new year, new life.”
The  words  moved  me.  I  looked  at  Lila,  she,  too,  was  confused.  She
murmured, “We have to talk to my brother.”
“Let me know.”
“And the fireworks?”
“What do you mean?”
“We’ll bring ours, and you?”
Stefano smiled. “How many fireworks do you want?”
“Lots.”
The young man again addressed me: “Come to my house and I promise you
that we’ll still be setting them off at dawn.”
21.
The whole way home we laughed till our sides ached, saying things like:
“He’s doing it for you.”
“No, for you.”
“He’s in love and to have you at his house he’ll invite even the Communists,
even the murderers of his father.”
“What are you talking about? He didn’t even look at me.”
Rino listened to Stefano’s proposal and immediately said no. But the wish to
vanquish the Solaras kept him uncertain and he talked about it with Pasquale,
who got very angry. Enzo on the other hand mumbled, “All right, I’ll come if I
can.” As for our parents, they were very pleased with that invitation because
for them Don Achille no longer existed and his children and his wife were
good, well-to-do people whom it was an honor to have as friends.
Lila at first seemed in a daze, as if she had forgotten where she was, the
streets, the neighborhood, the shoemaker’s shop. Then she appeared at my
house late one afternoon with a look as if she had understood everything and
said to me: “We were wrong: Stefano doesn’t want me or you.”
We discussed it in our usual fashion, mixing facts with fantasies. If he didn’t
want us, what did he want? We thought that Stefano, too, intended to teach
the Solaras a lesson. We recalled when Michele had expelled Pasquale from
Gigliola’s mother’s party, thus interfering in the affairs of the Carraccis and
giving Stefano the appearance of a man unable to defend the memory of his
father. On that occasion, if you thought about it, the brothers had insulted not
only Pasquale but also him. And so now he was raising the stakes, as if to spite
them: he was making a conclusive peace with the Pelusos, even inviting them
to his house for New Year’s Eve.
“And who benefits?” I asked Lila.
“I don’t know. He wants to make a gesture that no one would make here in
the neighborhood.”
“Forgive?”
Lila shook her head skeptically. She was trying to understand, we were both
trying to understand, and understanding was something that we loved to do.
Stefano didn’t seem the type capable of forgiveness. According to Lila he had
something else in mind. And slowly, proceeding from one of the ideas she
hadn’t been able to get out of her head since the moment she started talking to
Pasquale, she seemed to find a solution.
“You  remember  when  I  said  to  Carmela  that  she  could  be  Alfonso’s
girlfriend?”
“Yes.”
“Stefano has in mind something like that.”
“Marry Carmela?”
“More.”
Stefano, according to Lila, wanted to clear away everything. He wanted to
try to get out of the before. He didn’t want to pretend it was nothing, as our
parents did, but rather to set in motion a phrase like: I know, my father was
what he was, but now I’m here, we are us, and so, enough. In other words, he
wanted to  make  the whole  neighborhood  understand  that he  was  not Don
Achille and that the Pelusos were not the former carpenter who had killed him.
That hypothesis pleased us, it immediately became a certainty, and we had an
impulse of great fondness for the young Carracci. We decided to take his part.
We went to explain to Rino, to Pasquale, to Antonio that Stefano’s invitation
was more than an invitation, that behind it were important meanings, that it
was as if he were saying: before us some ugly things happened; our fathers,
some in one way, some in another, didn’t behave well; from this moment, we
take note of that and show that we children are better than they were.
“Better?” Rino asked, with interest.
“Better,” I said. “The complete opposite of the Solaras, who are worse than
their grandfather and their father.”
I spoke with great excitement, in Italian, as if I were in school. Lila herself
glanced  at  me  in  amazement,  and  Rino,  Pasquale,  and  Antonio  muttered,
embarrassed. Pasquale even tried to answer in Italian but he gave up. He said
somberly:
“His father made money on the black market, and now Stefano is using it to
make more money. His shop is in the place where my father’s carpenter shop
was.”
Lila narrowed her eyes, so you almost couldn’t see them.
“It’s true. But do you prefer to be on the side of someone who wants to
change or on the side of the Solaras?”
Pasquale said proudly, partly out of conviction, partly because he was visibly
jealous of Stefano’s unexpected central role in Lila’s words, “I’m on my own
side and that’s it.”
But he was an honest soul, he thought it over again and again. He talked to
his mother, he discussed it with the whole family. Giuseppina, who had been a
tireless, good-natured worker, relaxed and exuberant, had become after her
husband’s imprisonment a slovenly woman, depressed by her bad luck, and she
turned to the priest. The priest went to Stefano’s shop, talked for a long time
with Maria, then went back to talk to Giuseppina Peluso. In the end everyone
was persuaded that life was already very difficult, and that if it was possible, on
the occasion of the new year, to reduce its tensions, it would be better for
everyone. So at 11:30 P.M. on December 31st, after the New Year’s Eve dinner,
various families—the family of the former carpenter, the family of the porter,
that of the shoemaker, that of the fruit and vegetable seller, the family of
Melina, who that night had made an effort with her appearance—climbed up to
the fifth floor, to the old, hated home of Don Achille, to celebrate the new year
together.
22.
Stefano welcomed us with great cordiality. I remember that he had dressed
with care, his face was slightly flushed because of his agitation, he was wearing
a white shirt and a tie, and a blue sleeveless vest. I found him very handsome,
with the manners of a prince. I calculated that he was seven years older than
me and Lila, and I thought then that to have Gino as a boyfriend, a boy of my
own age, was a small thing: when I asked him to come to the Carraccis’ with
me, he had said that he couldn’t, because his parents wouldn’t let him go out
after midnight, it was dangerous. I wanted an older boyfriend, one like those
young men, Stefano, Pasquale, Rino, Antonio, Enzo. I looked at them, I hovered
about them all evening. I nervously touched my earrings, my mother’s silver
bracelet. I had begun to feel pretty again and I wanted to read the proof in
their eyes. But they all seemed taken up by the fireworks that would start at
midnight. They were waiting for their war of men and didn’t pay attention
even to Lila.
Stefano was kind especially to Signora Peluso and to Melina, who didn’t say a
word, she had wild eyes and a long nose, but she had combed her hair, and,
with her earrings, and her old black widow’s dress, she looked like a lady. At
midnight the master of the house filled first his mother’s glass with spumante
and right afterward that of Pasquale’s mother. We toasted all the marvelous
things that would happen in the new year, then we began to swarm toward the
terrace, the old people and children in coats and scarves, because it was very
cold. I realized that the only one who lingered indifferently downstairs was
Alfonso. I called him, out of politeness, but he didn’t hear me, or pretended not
to. I ran up. Above me was a tremendous cold sky, full of stars and shadows.
The  boys  wore  sweaters,  except  Pasquale  and  Enzo,  who  were  in
shirtsleeves. Lila and Ada and Carmela and I had on the thin dresses we wore
for dancing parties and were trembling with cold and excitement. Already we
could hear the first whizz of the rockets as they furrowed the sky and exploded
in  bright-colored  flowers.  Already  the  thud  of  old  things  flying  out  the
windows could be heard, with shouts and laughter. The whole neighborhood
was in an uproar, setting off firecrackers. I lighted sparklers and pinwheels for
the children, I liked to see in their eyes the fearful wonder that I had felt as a
child. Lila persuaded Melina to light the fuse of a Bengal light with her: the jet
of flame sprayed with a colorful crackle. They shouted with joy and hugged
each other.
Rino,  Stefano,  Pasquale,  Enzo,  Antonio  transported  cases  and  boxes  and
cartons  of  explosives,  proud  of  all  those  supplies  they  had  managed  to
accumulate. Alfonso also helped, but he did it wearily, reacting to his brother’s
pressure with gestures of annoyance. He seemed intimidated by Rino, who was
truly frenzied, pushing him rudely, grabbing things away from him, treating
him like a child. So finally, rather than get angry, Alfonso withdrew, mingling
less  and  less  with  the  others.  Meanwhile  the  matches  flared  as  the  adults
lighted cigarettes for each other with cupped hands, speaking seriously and
cordially.  If  there  should  be  a  civil  war,  I  thought,  like  the  one  between
Romulus and Remus, between Marius and Silla, between Caesar and Pompey,
they will have these same faces, these same looks, these same poses.
Except  for  Alfonso,  all  the  boys  filled  their  shirts  with  firecrackers  and
missiles  and  arranged  rows  of  rockets  in  ranks  of  empty  bottles.  Rino,
increasingly agitated, shouting louder and louder, assigned to me, Lila, Ada,
and Carmela the job of supplying everyone with ammunition. Then the very
young, the young, the not so young—my brothers Peppe and Gianni, but also
my  father,  also  the  shoemaker,  who  was  the  oldest  of  all—began  moving
around in the dark and the cold lighting fuses and throwing fireworks over the
parapet or into the sky, in a celebratory atmosphere of growing excitement, of
shouts like did you see those colors, wow what a bang, come on, come on—all
scarcely disturbed by Melina’s faint yet terrified wails, by Rino as he snatched
the fireworks from my brothers and used them himself, yelling that it was a
waste because the boys threw them without waiting for the fuse to really catch
fire.
The glittering fury of the city slowly faded, died out, letting the sound of the
cars,  the  horns  emerge.  Broad  zones  of  dark  sky  reappeared.  The  Solaras’
balcony became, even through the smoke, amid the flashes, more visible.
They weren’t far, we could see them. The father, the sons, the relatives, the
friends were, like us, in the grip of a desire for chaos. The whole neighborhood
knew that what had happened so far was minor, the real show would begin
when the penurious had finished with their little parties and petty explosions
and fine rains of silver and gold, when only the masters of the revels remained.
And so it was. From the balcony the fire intensified abruptly, the sky and the
street began to explode again. At every burst, especially if the firecracker made
a sound of destruction, enthusiastic obscenities came from the balcony. But,
unexpectedly, here were Stefano, Pasquale, Antonio, Rino ready to respond
with more bursts and equivalent obscenities. At a rocket from the Solaras they
launched  a  rocket,  a  string  of  firecrackers  was  answered  by  a  string  of
firecrackers, and in the sky miraculous fountains erupted, and the street below
flared,  trembled.  At  one  point  Rino  climbed  up  onto  the  parapet  shouting
insults  and  throwing  powerful  firecrackers  while  his  mother  shrieked  with
terror, yelling, “Get down or you’ll fall.”
At  that  point  panic  overwhelmed  Melina,  who  began  to  wail.  Ada  was
furious, it was up to her to get her home, but Alfonso indicated that he would
take care of her, and he disappeared down the stairs with her. My mother
immediately  followed,  limping,  and  the  other  women  began  to  drag  the
children away. The Solaras’ explosions were becoming more and more violent,
one of their rockets instead of heading into the sky burst against the parapet of
our terrace with a loud red flash and suffocating smoke.
“They did it on purpose,” Rino yelled at Stefano, beside himself.
Stefano, a dark profile in the cold, motioned him to calm down. He hurried
to a corner where he himself had placed a box that we girls had received
orders  not  to  touch,  and  he  dipped  into  it,  inviting  the  others  to  help
themselves.
“Enzo,” he cried, with not even a trace now of the polite shopkeeper’s tones,
“Pascà, Rino, Antò, here, come on, here, we’ll show them what we’ve got.”
They all ran laughing. They repeated: yeah, we’ll let them have it, fuck those
shits, fuck, take this, and they made obscene gestures in the direction of the
Solaras’ balcony. Shivering with cold, we looked at their frenetic black forms.
We were alone, with no role. Even my father had gone downstairs, with the
shoemaker. Lila, I don’t know, she was silent, absorbed by the spectacle as if by
a puzzle.
The thing was happening to her that I mentioned and that she later called
dissolving margins. It was—she told me—as if, on the night of a full moon over
the sea, the intense black mass of a storm advanced across the sky, swallowing
every light, eroding the circumference of the moon’s circle, and disfiguring the
shining disk, reducing it to its true nature of rough insensate material. Lila
imagined, she saw, she felt—as if it were true—her brother break. Rino, before
her eyes, lost the features he had had as long as she could remember, the
features  of  the  generous,  candid  boy,  the  pleasing  features  of  the  reliable
young man, the beloved outline of one who, as far back as she had memory,
had amused, helped, protected her. There, amid the violent explosions, in the
cold,  in  the  smoke  that  burned  the  nostrils  and  the  strong  odor  of  sulfur,
something violated the organic structure of her brother, exercising over him a
pressure so strong that it broke down his outlines, and the matter expanded
like a magma, showing her what he was truly made of. Every second of that
night of celebration horrified her, she had the impression that, as Rino moved,
as he expanded around himself, every margin collapsed and her own margins,
too, became softer and more yielding. She struggled to maintain control, and
succeeded: on the outside her anguish hardly showed. It’s true that in the
tumult  of  explosions  and  colors  I  didn’t  pay  much  attention  to  her.  I  was
struck, I think, by her expression, which seemed increasingly fearful. I also
realized that she was staring at the shadow of her brother—the most active,
the most arrogant, shouting the loudest, bloodiest insults in the direction of
the Solaras’ terrace—with repulsion. It seemed that she, she who in general
feared nothing, was afraid. But they were impressions I recalled only later. At
the moment I didn’t notice, I felt closer to Carmela, to Ada, than to her. She
seemed as usual to have no need of male attention. We, instead, out in the cold,
in  the  midst  of  that  chaos,  without  that  attention  couldn’t  give  ourselves
meaning. We would have preferred that Stefano or Enzo or Rino stop the war,
put an arm around our shoulders, press us to them, side to side, and speak soft
words. Instead, we were holding on to each other to get warm, while they
rushed  to  grab  cylinders  with  fat  fuses,  astonished  by  Stefano’s  infinite
reserves, admiring of his generosity, disturbed by how much money could be
transformed  into  fiery  trails,  sparks,  explosions,  smoke  for  the  pure
satisfaction of winning.
They competed with the Solaras for I don’t know how long, explosions from
one side and the other as if terrace and balcony were trenches, and the whole
neighborhood  shook,  vibrated.  You  couldn’t  understand  anything—roars,
shattered glass, splintered sky. Even when Enzo shouted, “They’re finished,
they’ve  got  nothing  left,”  ours  continued,  Rino  especially  kept  going,  until
there  remained  not  a  fuse  to  light.  Then  they  raised  a  victorious  chorus,
jumping and embracing. Finally they calmed down, silence fell.
But it didn’t last; it was broken by the rising cry of a child in the distance,
shouts and insults, cars advancing through the streets littered with debris. And
then we saw flashes on the Solaras’ balcony, sharp sounds reached us, pah, pah.
Rino  shouted  in  disappointment,  “They’re  starting  again.”  But  Enzo,  who
immediately understood what was happening, pushed us inside, and after him
Pasquale, Stefano. Only Rino went on yelling vulgar insults, leaning over the
parapet, so that Lila dodged Pasquale and ran to pull her brother inside, yelling
insults at him in turn. We girls cried out as we went downstairs. The Solaras, in
order to win, were shooting at us.
23.
As  I  said,  many  things  about  that  night  escaped  me.  But  above  all,
overwhelmed by the atmosphere of celebration and danger, by the swirl of
males whose bodies gave off a heat hotter than the fires in the sky, I neglected
Lila. And yet it was then that her first inner change took place.
I didn’t realize, as I said, what had happened to her, the action was difficult
to perceive. But I was aware of the consequences almost immediately. She
became lazier. Two days later, I got up early, even though I didn’t have school,
to go with her to open the shop and help her do the cleaning, but she didn’t
appear.  She  arrived  late,  sullen,  and  we  walked  through  the  neighborhood
avoiding the shoemaker’s shop.
“You’re not going to work?”
“No.”
“Why?”
“I don’t like it anymore.”
“And the new shoes?”
“They’re nowhere.”
“And so?”
It  seemed  to  me  that  even  she  didn’t  know  what  she  wanted.  The  only
definite thing was that she seemed very worried about her brother, much more
than I had seen recently. And it was precisely as a result of that worry that she
began to modify her speeches about wealth. There was always the pressure to
become wealthy, there was no question about it, but the goal was no longer the
same as in childhood: no treasure chests, no sparkle of coins and precious
stones.  Now  it  seemed  that  money,  in  her  mind,  had  become  a  cement:  it
consolidated, reinforced, fixed this and that. Above all, it fixed Rino’s head. The
pair  of  shoes  that  they  had  made  together  he  now  considered  ready,  and
wanted to show them to Fernando. But Lila knew well (and according to her so
did Rino) that the work was full of flaws, that their father would examine the
shoes and throw them away. So she told him that they had to try and try again,
that the route to the shoe factory was a difficult one; but he was unwilling to
wait longer, he felt an urgent need to become like the Solaras, like Stefano, and
Lila couldn’t make him see reason. Suddenly it seemed to me that wealth in
itself  no  longer  interested  her.  She  no  longer  spoke  of  money  with  any
excitement, it was just a means of keeping her brother out of trouble. But since
it wasn’t around the corner, she wondered, with cruel eyes, what she had to
come up with to soothe him.
Rino  was  in  a  frenzy.  Fernando,  for  example,  never  reproached  Lila  for
having stopped coming to the shop, in fact he let her understand that he was
happy for her to stay home and help her mother. Her brother instead got
furious and in early January I witnessed another ugly quarrel. Rino approached
us with his head down, he blocked our path, he said to her, “Come to work
right now.” Lila answered that she wouldn’t think of it. He then dragged her by
the arm, she defied him with a nasty insult, Rino slapped her, shouted at her,
“Then  go  home,  go  and  help  Mamma.”  She  obeyed,  without  even  saying
goodbye to me.
The climax came on the day of the Befana.1 She, it seems, woke up and
found next to her bed a sock full of coal. She knew it was from Rino and at
breakfast she set the table for everyone but him. Her mother appeared: Rino
had left a sock full of candies and chocolate hanging on a chair, which had
moved her, she doted on that boy. So, when she realized that Rino’s place
wasn’t  set,  she  tried  to  set  it  but  Lila  prevented  her.  While  mother  and
daughter argued, Rino appeared and Lila immediately threw a piece of coal at
him. Rino laughed, thinking it was a game, that she had appreciated the joke,
but  when  he  realized  that  his  sister  was  serious  he  tried  to  hit  her.  Then
Fernando arrived, in underpants and undershirt, a cardboard box in his hand.
“Look what the Befana brought me,” he said, and it was clear that he was
furious.
He pulled out of the box the new shoes that his children had made in secret.
Lila was openmouthed with surprise. She didn’t know anything about it. Rino
had decided on his own to show his father their work, as if it were a gift from
the Befana.
When she saw on her brother’s face a small smile that was amused and at the
same time tormented, when she caught his worried gaze on his father’s face, it
seemed to her she had the confirmation of what had frightened her on the
terrace, amid the smoke and fireworks: Rino had lost his usual outline, she now
had a brother without boundaries, from whom something irreparable might
emerge. In that smile, in that gaze she saw something unbearably wretched,
the more unbearable the more she loved her brother, and felt the need to stay
beside him to help him and be helped.
“How  beautiful  they  are,”  said  Nunzia,  who  was  ignorant  of  the  whole
business.
Fernando, without saying a word, and now looking like an angry Randolph
Scott, sat down and put on first the right shoe, then the left.
“The Befana,” he said, “made them precisely for my feet.”
He got up, tried them, walked back and forth in the kitchen as his family
watched.
“Very comfortable,” he commented.
“They’re gentleman’s shoes,” his wife said, giving her son admiring looks.
Fernando sat down again. He took them off, he examined them above, below,
inside and outside.
“Whoever  made  these  shoes  is  a  master,”  he  said,  but  his  face  didn’t
brighten at all. “Brava, Befana.”
In every word you heard how much he suffered and how that suffering was
charging  him  with  a  desire  to  smash  everything.  But  Rino  didn’t  seem  to
realize it. At every sarcastic word of his father’s he became prouder, he smiled,
blushing, formulated half-phrases: I did like this, Papa, I added this, I thought
that.  Lila  wanted  to  get  out  of  the  kitchen,  out  of  the  way  of  her  father’s
imminent rage, but she couldn’t make up her mind, she didn’t want to leave
her brother alone.
“They’re  light  but  also  strong,”  Fernando  continued,  “there’s  no  cutting
corners. And I’ve never seen anything like them on anyone’s feet, with this
wide tip they’re very original.”
He sat down, he put them on again, he laced them. He said to his son: “Turn
around Rinù, I have to thank the Befana.”
Rino  thought  it  was  a  joke  that  would  conclusively  end  the  whole  long
controversy and he appeared happy and embarrassed. But as soon as he started
to turn his back his father kicked him violently in the rear, called him animal,
idiot, and threw at him whatever came to hand, finally even the shoes.
Lila got involved only when she saw that her brother, at first intent only on
protecting  himself  from  punching  and  kicking,  began  shouting,  too,
overturning chairs, breaking plates, crying, swearing that he would kill himself
rather than continue to work for his father for nothing, terrorizing his mother,
the other children, and the neighbors. But in vain. Father and son first had to
explode  until  they  wore  themselves  out.  Then  they  went  back  to  working
together, mute, shut up in the shop with their desperations.
There was no mention of the shoes for a while. Lila decided that her role was
to help her mother, do the marketing, cook, wash the clothes and hang them in
the sun, and she never went to the shoemaker’s shop. Rino, saddened, sulky,
felt the thing as an incomprehensible injustice and began to insist that he find
socks and underpants and shirts in order in his drawer, that his sister serve
him  and  show  him  respect  when  he  came  home  from  work.  If  something
wasn’t to his liking he protested, he said unpleasant things like you can’t even
iron a shirt, you shit. She shrugged, she didn’t resist, she continued to carry
out her duties with attention and care.
He himself, naturally, wasn’t happy with the way he was behaving, he was
tormented, he tried to calm down, he made not a few efforts to return to being
what he had been. On good days, Sunday mornings for example, he wandered
around joking, taking on a gentle tone of voice. “Are you mad at me because I
took all the credit for the shoes? I did it,” he said, lying, “to keep Papa from
getting angry at you.” And then he asked her, “Help me, what should we do
now? We can’t stop here, I have to get out of this situation.” Lila was silent: she
cooked, she ironed, at times she kissed him on the cheek to let him know that
she wasn’t mad anymore. But in the meantime he would get angry again, he
always ended up smashing something. He shouted that she had betrayed him,
and would betray him yet again, when, sooner or later, she would marry some
imbecile and go away, leaving him to live in this wretchedness forever.
Sometimes, when no one was home, Lila went into the little room where she
had hidden the shoes and touched them, looked at them, marveled to herself
that for good or ill there they were and had come into being as the result of a
design on a sheet of graph paper. How much wasted work.
 
 
 
1 In Italian folklore, the Befana is an old woman who delivers gifts to children, mostly in southern
Italy, on the eve of the Epiphany (the night of January 5th), like St. Nicholas or Santa Claus.
24.
I returned to school, I was dragged inside the torturous rhythms that the
teachers imposed on us. Many of my companions began to give up, the class
thinned out. Gino got low marks and asked me to help him. I tried to but really
all he wanted was for me to let him copy my homework. I did, but reluctantly:
even when he copied he didn’t pay attention, he didn’t try to understand. Even
Alfonso, although he was very disciplined, had difficulties. One day he burst
into  tears  during  the  Greek  interrogation,  something  that  for  a  boy  was
considered very humiliating. It was clear that he would have preferred to die
rather than shed a single tear in front of the class, but he couldn’t control it.
We were all silent, extremely disturbed, except Gino, who, perhaps for the
satisfaction of seeing that even for his deskmate things could go badly, burst
out laughing. As we left school I told him that because of that laughter he was
no  longer  my  boyfriend.  He  responded  by  asking  me,  worried,  “You  like
Alfonso?” I explained that I simply didn’t like him anymore. He stammered
that we had scarcely started, it wasn’t fair. Not much had happened between us
as boyfriend and girlfriend: we’d kissed but without tongues, he had tried to
touch my breasts and I had got angry and pushed him away. He begged me to
continue just for a little, I was firm in my decision. I knew that it would cost me
nothing to lose his company on the way to school and the way home.
A few days had passed since the break with Gino when Lila confided that she
had  had  two  declarations  almost  at  the  same  time,  the  first  in  her  life.
Pasquale, one morning, had come up to her while she was doing the shopping.
He was marked by fatigue, and extremely agitated. He had said that he was
worried because he hadn’t seen her in the shoemaker’s shop and thought she
was sick. Now that he found her in good health, he was happy. But there was
no happiness in his face at all as he spoke. He broke off as if he were choking
and, to free his voice, had almost shouted that he loved her. He loved her so
much that, if she agreed, he would come and speak to her brother, her parents,
whoever, immediately, so that they could be engaged. She was dumbstruck, for
a few minutes she thought he was joking. I had said a thousand times that
Pasquale had his eyes on her, but she had never believed me. Now there he
was, on a beautiful spring day, almost with tears in his eyes, and was begging
her, telling her his life was worth nothing if she said no. How difficult the
sentiments of love were to untangle. Lila, very cautiously, but without ever
saying no, had found words to refuse him. She had said that she loved him, but
not as one should love a fiancé. She had also said that she would always be
grateful  to  him  for  all  the  things  he  had  explained  to  her:  Fascism,  the
Resistance, the monarchy, the republic, the black market, Comandante Lauro,
the neo-fascists, Christian Democracy, Communism. But to be his girlfriend, no,
she would never be anyone’s girlfriend. And she had concluded: “I love all of
you, Antonio, you, Enzo, the way I love Rino.” Pasquale had then murmured, “I,
however, don’t love you the way I do Carmela.” He had escaped and gone back
to work.
“And the other declaration?” I asked her, curious but also a little anxious.
“You’d never imagine.”
The other declaration had come from Marcello Solara.
In hearing that name I felt a pang. If Pasquale’s love was a sign of how much
someone could like Lila, the love of Marcello—a young man who was handsome
and wealthy, with a car, who was harsh and violent, a Camorrist, used, that is,
to  taking  the  women  he  wanted—was,  in  my  eyes,  in  the  eyes  of  all  my
contemporaries,  and  in  spite  of  his  bad  reputation,  in  fact  perhaps  even
because of it, a promotion, the transition from skinny little girl to woman
capable of making anyone bend to her will.
“How did it happen?”
Marcello was driving the 1100, by himself, without his brother, and had seen
her as she was going home along the stradone. He hadn’t driven up alongside
her, he hadn’t called to her from the window. He had left the car in the middle
of the street, with the door open, and approached her. Lila had kept walking,
and he followed. He had pleaded with her to forgive him for his behavior in the
past, he admitted she would have been absolutely right to kill him with the
shoemaker’s knife. He had reminded her, with emotion, how they had danced
rock and roll so well together at Gigliola’s mother’s party, a sign of how well
matched they might be. Finally he had started to pay her compliments: “How
you’ve grown up, what lovely eyes you have, how beautiful you are.” And then
he told her a dream he had had that night: he asked her to become engaged,
she said yes, he gave her an engagement ring like his grandmother’s, which
had three diamonds in the band of the setting. At last Lila, continuing to walk,
had spoken. She had asked, “In that dream I said yes?” Marcello confirmed it
and she replied, “Then it really was a dream, because you’re an animal, you and
your family, your grandfather, your brother, and I would never be engaged to
you even if you tell me you’ll kill me.”
“You told him that?”
“I said more.”
“What?”
When Marcello, insulted, had replied that his feelings were delicate, that he
thought  of  her  only  with  love,  night  and  day,  that  therefore  he  wasn’t  an
animal but one who loved her, she had responded that if a person behaved as
he  had  behaved  with  Ada,  if  that  same  person  on  New  Year’s  Eve  started
shooting  people  with  a  gun,  to  call  him  an  animal  was  to  insult  animals.
Marcello  had  finally  understood  that  she  wasn’t  joking,  that  she  really
considered him less than a frog, a salamander, and he was suddenly depressed.
He had murmured weakly, “It was my brother who was shooting.” But even as
he spoke he had realized that that excuse would only increase her contempt.
Very true. Lila had started walking faster and when he tried to follow had
yelled, “Go away,” and started running. Marcello then had stopped as if he
didn’t remember where he was and what he was supposed to be doing, and so
he had gone back to the 1100.
“You did that to Marcello Solara?”
“Yes.”
“You’re crazy: don’t tell anyone you treated him like that.”
At  the  moment  it  seemed  to  me  superfluous  advice,  I  said  it  just  to
demonstrate that I was concerned. Lila by nature liked talking and fantasizing
about facts, but she never gossiped, unlike the rest us, who were continuously
talking about people. And in fact she spoke only to me of Pasquale’s love, I
never discovered that she had told anyone else. But she told everyone about
Marcello Solara. So that when I saw Carmela she said, “Did you know that your
friend said no to Marcello Solara?” I met Ada, who said to me, “Your friend said
no to Marcello Solara, no less.” Pinuccia Carracci, in the shop, whispered in my
ear, “Is it true that your friend said no to Marcello Solara?” Even Alfonso said
to me one day at school, astonished, “Your friend said no to Marcello Solara?”
When I saw Lila I said to her, “You shouldn’t have told everyone, Marcello
will get angry.”
She shrugged. She had work to do, her siblings, the housework, her mother,
her father, and she didn’t stop to talk much. Now, as she had been since New
Year’s Eve, she was occupied only with domestic things.
25.
So it was. For the rest of the term Lila was totally uninterested in what I did
in school. And when I asked her what books she was taking out of the library,
what  she  was  reading,  she  answered,  spitefully,  “I  don’t  take  them  out
anymore, books give me a headache.”
Whereas I studied, reading now was like a pleasant habit. But I soon had to
observe that, since Lila had stopped pushing me, anticipating me in my studies
and my reading, school, and even Maestro Ferraro’s library, had stopped being
a kind of adventure and had become only a thing that I knew how to do well
and was much praised for.
I realized this clearly on two occasions.
Once I went to get some books out of the library. My card was dense with
borrowings  and  returns,  and  the  teacher  first  congratulated  me  on  my
diligence, then asked me about Lila, showing regret that she and her whole
family had stopped taking out books. It’s hard to explain why, but that regret
made me suffer. It seemed to be the sign of a true interest in Lila, something
much stronger than the compliments for my discipline as a constant reader. It
occurred to me that if Lila had taken out just a single book a year, on that book
she would have left her imprint and the teacher would have felt it the moment
she returned it, while I left no mark, I embodied only the persistence with
which I added volume to volume in no particular order.
The  other  circumstance  had  to  do  with  school  exercises.  The  literature
teacher, Gerace, gave back, corrected, our Italian papers (I still remember the
subject: “The Various Phases of the Tragedy of Dido”), and while he generally
confined himself to saying a word or two to justify the eight or nine I usually
got, this time he praised me eloquently in front of the class and revealed only
at the end that he had given me a ten. At the end of the class he called me into
the corridor, truly impressed by how I had treated the subject, and when the
religion  teacher  came  by  he  stopped  him  and  summarized  my  paper
enthusiastically. A few days passed and I realized that Gerace had not limited
himself to the priest but had circulated that paper of mine among the other
teachers, and not only in my section. Some teachers in the upper grades now
smiled at me in the corridors, or even made comments. For example, Professor
Galiani, a woman who was highly regarded and yet avoided, because she was
said to be a Communist, and because with one or two comments she could
dismantle any argument that did not have a solid foundation, stopped me in
the hall and spoke with particular admiration about the idea, central to my
paper, that if love is exiled from cities, their good nature becomes an evil
nature. She asked me:
“What does ‘a city without love’ mean to you?”
“A people deprived of happiness.”
“Give me an example.”
I thought of the discussions I’d had with Lila and Pasquale in September and
I suddenly felt that they were a true school, truer than the one I went to every
day.
“Italy under Fascism, Germany under Nazism, all of us human beings in the
world today.”
She scrutinized me with increased interest. She said that I wrote very well,
she recommended some reading, she offered to lend me books. Finally, she
asked me what my father did, I answered, “He’s a porter at the city hall.” She
went off with her head down.
The interest shown by Professor Galiani naturally filled me with pride, but it
had no great consequence; the school routine returned to normal. As a result,
even the fact that, in my first year, I was a student with a small reputation for
being clever soon seemed to me unimportant. In the end what did it prove? It
proved how fruitful it had been to study with Lila and talk to her, to have her
as a goad and support as I ventured into the world outside the neighborhood,
among the things and persons and landscapes and ideas of books. Of course, I
said to myself, the essay on Dido is mine, the capacity to formulate beautiful
sentences comes from me; of course, what I wrote about Dido belongs to me;
but didn’t I work it out with her, didn’t we excite each other in turn, didn’t my
passion grow in the warmth of hers? And that idea of the city without love,
which the teachers had liked so much, hadn’t it come to me from Lila, even if I
had developed it, with my own ability? What should I deduce from this?
I began to expect new praise that would prove my autonomous virtuosity.
But  Gerace,  when  he  gave  another  assignment  on  the  Queen  of  Carthage
(“Aeneas  and  Dido:  An  Encounter  Between  Two  Refugees”),  was  not
enthusiastic,  he  gave  me  only  an  eight.  Still,  from  Professor  Galiani  I  got
cordial nods of greeting and the pleasant discovery that she was the Latin and
Greek teacher of Nino Sarratore. I urgently needed some reinforcements of
attention and admiration, and hoped that maybe they would come from him. I
hoped that, if his professor of literature had praised me in public, let’s say in
his class, he would remember me and finally would speak to me. But nothing
happened, I continued to glimpse him on the way out, on the way in, always
with that absorbed expression, never a glance. Once I even followed him along
Corso Garibaldi and Via Casanova, hoping he would notice me and say: Hello, I
see we’re taking the same route, I’ve heard a lot about you. But he walked
quickly, eyes down, and never turned. I got tired, I despised myself. Depressed,
I turned onto Corso Novara and went home.
I  kept  on  day  after  day,  committed  to  asserting,  with  increasing
thoroughness, to the teachers, to my classmates, to myself my application and
diligence. But inside I felt a growing sense of solitude, I felt I was learning
without energy. I tried to report to Lila Maestro Ferraro’s regret, I told her to
go back to the library. I also mentioned to her how well the assignment on
Dido had been received, without telling her what I had written but letting her
know that it was also her success. She listened to me without interest, maybe
she no longer even remembered what we had said about that character, she
had other problems. As soon as I left her an opening she told me that Marcello
Solara had not resigned himself like Pasquale but continued to pursue her. If
she went out to do the shopping he followed her, without bothering her, to
Stefano’s store, to Enzo’s cart, just to look at her. If she went to the window she
found him at the corner, waiting for her to appear. This constancy made her
anxious. She was afraid that her father might notice, and, especially, that Rino
might notice. She was frightened by the possibility that one of those stories of
men  would  begin,  in  which  they  end  up  fighting  all  the  time—there  were
plenty of those in the neighborhood. “What do I have?” she said. She saw
herself as scrawny, ugly: why had Marcello become obsessed with her? “Is
there  something  wrong  with  me?”  she  said.  “I  make  people  do  the  wrong
thing.”
Now she often repeated that idea. The conviction of having done more harm
than good for her brother had solidified. “All you have to do is look at him,”
she said. Even with the disappearance of the Cerullo shoe factory project, Rino
was gripped by the mania of getting rich like the Solaras, like Stefano, and even
more, and he couldn’t resign himself to the dailiness of the work in the shop.
He  said,  trying  to  rekindle  her  old  enthusiasm,  “We’re  intelligent,  Lina,
together no one can stop us, tell me what we should do.” He also wanted to buy
a  car,  a  television,  and  he  detested  Fernando,  who  didn’t  understand  the
importance of these things. But when Lila showed that she wouldn’t support
him anymore, he treated her worse than a servant. Maybe he didn’t even know
that  he  had  changed  for  the  worse,  but  she,  who  saw  him  every  day,  was
alarmed.  She  said  to  me  once,  “Have  you  seen  that  when  people  wake  up
they’re ugly, all disfigured, can’t see?”
Rino in her view had become like that.
26.
One Sunday, in the middle of April, I remember, five of us went out: Lila,
Carmela, Pasquale, Rino, and I. We girls were dressed up as well as we could
and as soon as we were out of the house we put on lipstick and a little eye
makeup. We took the metro, which was very crowded, and Rino and Pasquale
stood  next  to  us,  on  the  lookout,  the  whole  way.  They  were  afraid  that
someone might touch us, but no one did, the faces of our escorts were too
dangerous.
We walked down Toledo. Lila insisted on going to Via Chiaia, Via Filangieri,
and then Via dei Mille, to Piazza Amedeo, an area where she knew there would
be wealthy, elegant people. Rino and Pasquale were opposed, but they couldn’t
or wouldn’t explain, and responded only by muttering in dialect and insulting
indeterminate people they called “dandies.” We three ganged up and insisted.
Just then we heard honking. We turned and saw the Solaras’ 1100. We didn’t
even notice the two brothers, we were so struck by the girls who were waving
from the windows: Gigliola and Ada. They looked pretty, with pretty dresses,
pretty hairdos, sparkling earrings, they waved and shouted happy greetings to
us.  Rino  and  Pasquale  turned  their  faces  away,  Carmela  and  I  were  too
surprised to respond. Lila was the only one to shout enthusiastically and wave,
with broad motions of her arms, as the car disappeared in the direction of
Piazza Plebiscito.
For a while we were silent, then Rino said to Pasquale he had always known
that Gigliola was a whore, and Pasquale gravely agreed. Neither of the two
mentioned Ada, Antonio was their friend and they didn’t want to offend him.
Carmela, however, said a lot of mean things about Ada. More than anything, I
felt bitterness. That image of power had passed in a flash, four young people in
a car—that was the right way to leave the neighborhood and have fun. Ours
was the wrong way: on foot, in shabby old clothes, penniless. I felt like going
home. Lila reacted as if that encounter had never taken place, insisting again
that she wanted to go for a walk where the fancy people were. She clung to
Pasquale’s arm, she yelled, she laughed, she performed what she thought of as
a parody of the respectable person, with waggling hips, a broad smile, and
simpering gestures. We hesitated a moment and then went along with her,
resentful at the idea that Gigliola and Ada were having fun in the 1100 with the
handsome Solaras while we were on foot, in the company of Rino who resoled
shoes and Pasquale who was a construction worker.
This  dissatisfaction  of  ours,  naturally  unspoken,  must  somehow  have
reached the two boys, who looked at each other, sighed, and gave in. All right,
they said, and we turned onto Via Chiaia.
It  was  like  crossing  a  border.  I  remember  a  dense  crowd  and  a  sort  of
humiliating difference. I looked not at the boys but at the girls, the women:
they were absolutely different from us. They seemed to have breathed another
air, to have eaten other food, to have dressed on some other planet, to have
learned to walk on wisps of wind. I was astonished. All the more so that, while I
would have paused to examine at leisure dresses, shoes, the style of glasses if
they wore glasses, they passed by without seeming to see me. They didn’t see
any of the five of us. We were not perceptible. Or not interesting. And in fact if
at times their gaze fell on us, they immediately turned in another direction, as
if irritated. They looked only at each other.
Of this we were all aware. No one mentioned it, but we understood that Rino
and Pasquale, who were older, found on those streets only confirmation of
things they already knew, and this put them in a bad mood, made them sullen,
resentful at the certainty of being out of place, while we girls discovered it only
at  that  moment  and  with  ambiguous  sentiments.  We  felt  uneasy  and  yet
fascinated, ugly but also impelled to imagine what we would become if we had
some way to re-educate ourselves and dress and put on makeup and adorn
ourselves properly. Meanwhile, in order not to ruin the evening, we became
mocking, sarcastic.
“Would you ever wear that dress?”
“Not if you paid me.”
“I would.”
“Good for you, you’d look like a cream puff, like that lady there.”
“And did you see the shoes?”
“What, those are shoes?”
We went as far as Palazzo Cellammare laughing and joking. Pasquale, who
did his best to avoid being next to Lila and when she took his arm immediately,
politely, freed himself (he spoke to her often, of course, he felt an evident
pleasure  in  hearing  her  voice,  in  looking  at  her,  but  it  was  clear  that  the
slightest contact overwhelmed him, might even make him cry), staying close
to me, asked derisively:
“At school do your classmates look like that?”
“No.”
“That means it’s not a good school.”
“It’s a classical high school,” I said, offended.
“It’s not a good one,” he insisted, “you can be sure that if there are no people
like that it’s no good: right, Lila, it’s no good?”
“Good?” Lila said, and pointed to a blond girl who was coming toward us
with a tall, dark young man, in a white V-neck sweater. “If there’s no one like
that, your school stinks.” And she burst out laughing.
The girl was all in green: green shoes, green skirt, green jacket, and on her
head—this was above all what made Lila laugh—she wore a bowler, like Charlie
Chaplin, also green.
The hilarity passed from her to the rest of us. When the couple went by Rino
made a vulgar comment on what the young woman in green should do, with
the bowler hat, and Pasquale stopped, he was laughing so hard, and leaned
against the wall with one arm. The girl and her companion took a few steps,
then  stopped.  The  boy  in  the  white  pullover  turned,  was  immediately
restrained  by  the  girl,  who  grabbed  his  arm.  He  wriggled  free,  came  back,
addressed directly to Rino a series of insulting phrases. It was an instant. Rino
punched him in the face and knocked him down, shouting:
“What did you call me? I didn’t get it, repeat, what did you call me? Did you
hear, Pascà, what he called me?”
Our laughter abruptly turned to fear. Lila first of all hurled herself at her
brother before he started kicking the young man on the ground and dragged
him off, with an expression of disbelief, as if a thousand fragments of our life,
from childhood to this, our fourteenth year, were composing an image that
was finally clear, yet which at that moment seemed to her incredible.
We pushed Rino and Pasquale away, while the girl in the bowler helped her
boyfriend get up. Lila’s incredulity meanwhile was changing into fury. As she
tried to get her brother off she assailed him with the coarsest insults, pulled
him by the arm, threatened him. Rino kept her away with one hand, a nervous
laugh on his face, and meanwhile he turned to Pasquale:
“My sister thinks this is a game, Pascà,” he said in dialect, his eyes wild, “my
sister thinks that even if I say it’s better for us not to go somewhere, she can do
it, because she always knows everything, she always understands everything,
as usual, and she can go there like it or not.” A short pause to regain his breath,
then he added, “Did you hear that shit called me ‘hick’? Me a hick? A hick?”
And still, breathless, “My sister brought me here and now she sees if I’m called
a hick, now she sees what I do if they call me a hick.”
“Calm down, Rino,” Pasquale said, looking behind him every so often, in
alarm.
Rino remained agitated, but subdued. Lila, however, had calmed down. We
stopped at Piazza dei Martiri. Pasquale said, almost coldly, addressing Carmela:
“You girls go home now.”
“Alone?”
“Yes.”
“No.”
“Carmè, I don’t want to discuss it: go.”
“We don’t know how to get there.”
“Don’t lie.”
“Go,” Rino said to Lila, trying to contain himself. “Take some money, buy an
ice cream on the way.”
“We left together and we’re going back together.”
Rino lost patience again, gave her a shove: “Will you stop it? I’m older and
you do what I tell you. Move, go, in a second I’ll bash your face in.”
I saw that he was ready to do it seriously, I dragged Lila by the arm. She also
understood the risk: “I’ll tell Papa.”
“Who  gives  a  fuck.  Walk,  come  on,  go,  you  don’t  even  deserve  the  ice
cream.”
Hesitantly we went up past Santa Caterina. But after a while Lila had second
thoughts, stopped, said that she was going back to her brother. We tried to
persuade her to stay with us, but she wouldn’t listen. Just then we saw a group
of  boys,  five,  maybe  six,  they  looked  like  the  rowers  we  had  sometimes
admired on Sunday walks near Castel dell’Ovo. They were all tall, sturdy, well
dressed. Some had sticks, some didn’t. They quickly passed by the church and
headed toward the piazza. Among them was the young man whom Rino had
struck in the face; his V-necked sweater was stained with blood.
Lila freed herself from my grip and ran off, Carmela and I behind her. We
arrived in time to see Rino and Pasquale backing up toward the monument at
the center of the piazza, side by side, while those well-dressed youths chased
them, hitting them with their sticks. We called for help, we began to cry, to
stop  people  passing,  but  the  sticks  were  frightening,  no  one  helped.  Lila
grabbed the arm of one of the attackers but was thrown to the ground. I saw
Pasquale on his knees, being kicked, I saw Rino protecting himself from the
blows with his arm. Then a car stopped and it was the Solaras’ 1100.
Marcello got out immediately. First he helped Lila up and then, incited by
her, as she shrieked with rage and shouted at her brother, threw himself into
the fight, hitting and getting hit. Only at that point Michele got out of the car,
opened the trunk in a leisurely way, took out something that looked like a
shiny iron bar, and joined in, hitting with a cold ferocity that I hope never to
see  again  in  my  life.  Rino  and  Pasquale  got  up  furiously,  hitting,  choking,
tearing—they seemed like strangers, they were so transformed by hatred. The
well-dressed young men were routed. Michele went up to Pasquale, whose
nose was bleeding, but Pasquale rudely pushed him away and wiped his face
with the sleeve of his white shirt, then saw that it was soaked red. Marcello
picked up a bunch of keys and handed it to Rino, who thanked him uneasily.
The people who had kept their distance before now came over, curious. I was
paralyzed with fear.
“Take the girls away,” Rino said to the two Solaras, in the grateful tone of
someone who makes a request that he knows is unavoidable.
Marcello made us get in the car, first Lila, who resisted. We were all jammed
in the back seat, sitting on each other’s knees. I turned to look at Pasquale and
Rino, who were heading toward the Riviera, Pasquale limping. I felt as if our
neighborhood had expanded, swallowing all Naples, even the streets where
respectable people lived. In the car there were immediate tensions. Gigliola
and  Ada  were  annoyed,  protesting  that  the  ride  was  uncomfortable.  “It’s
impossible,” they said. “Then get out and walk,” Lila shouted and they were
about to start hitting each other. Marcello braked, amused. Gigliola got out and
went to sit in front, on Michele’s knees. We made the journey like that, with
Gigliola and Michele kissing each other in front of us. I looked at her and she,
though kissing passionately, looked at me. I turned away.
Lila said nothing until we reached the neighborhood. Marcello said a few
words,  his  eyes  looking  for  her  in  the  rear-view  mirror,  but  she  never
responded. They let us out far from our houses, so that we wouldn’t be seen in
the Solaras’ car. The rest of the way we walked, the five of us. Apart from Lila,
who seemed consumed by anger and worry, we all admired the behavior of the
two  brothers.  Good  for  them,  we  said,  they  behaved  well.  Gigliola  kept
repeating, “Of course,” “What did you think,” “Naturally,” with the air of one
who, working in the pastry shop, knew very well what first-rate people the
Solaras were. At one point she asked me, but in a teasing tone:
“How’s school?”
“Great.”
“But you don’t have fun the way I do.”
“It’s a different type of fun.”
When she, Carmela, and Ada left us at the entrance of their building, I said to
Lila:
“The rich people certainly are worse than we are.”
She didn’t answer. I added, cautiously, “The Solaras may be shit, but it’s
lucky they were there: those people on Via dei Mille might have killed Rino
and Pasquale.”
She shook her head energetically. She was paler than usual and under her
eyes were deep purple hollows. She didn’t agree but she didn’t tell me why.
27.
I  was  promoted  with  nines  in  all  my  subjects,  I  would  even  receive
something called a scholarship. Of the forty we had been, thirty-two remained.
Gino failed, Alfonso had to retake the exams in three subjects in September.
Urged by my father, I went to see Maestra Oliviero—my mother was against it,
she didn’t like the teacher to interfere in her family and claim the right to
make decisions about her children in her place—with the usual two packets,
one of sugar and one of coffee, bought at the Bar Solara, to thank her for her
interest in me.
She wasn’t feeling well, she had something in her throat that hurt her, but
she was full of praise, congratulated me on how hard I had worked, said that I
looked a little too pale and that she intended to telephone a cousin who lived
on Ischia to see if she would let me stay with her for a little while. I thanked
her, but said nothing to my mother of that possibility. I already knew that she
wouldn’t let me go. Me on Ischia? Me alone on the ferry traveling over the sea?
Not to mention me on the beach, swimming, in a bathing suit?
I didn’t even mention it to Lila. Her life in a few months had lost even the
adventurous aura associated with the shoe factory, and I didn’t want to boast
about  the  promotion,  the  scholarship,  a  possible  vacation  in  Ischia.  In
appearance things had improved: Marcello Solara had stopped following her.
But after the violence in Piazza dei Martiri something completely unexpected
happened that puzzled her. He came to the shop to ask about Rino’s condition,
and the honor conferred by that visit perturbed Fernando. But Rino, who had
been careful not to tell his father what had happened (to explain the bruises on
his face and his body he made up a story that he had fallen off a friend’s
Lambretta),  and  worried  that  Marcello  might  say  one  word  too  many,  had
immediately steered him out into the street. They had taken a short walk. Rino
had reluctantly thanked Solara both for his intervention and for the kindness
of coming to see how he was. Two minutes and they had said goodbye. When
he returned to the shop his father had said: “Finally you’re doing something
good.”
“What?”
“A friendship with Marcello Solara.”
“There’s no friendship, Papa.”
“Then it means you were a fool and a fool you remain.”
Fernando  wanted  to  say  that  something  was  changing  and  that  his  son,
whatever  he  wanted  to  call  that  thing  with  the  Solaras,  would  do  well  to
encourage it. He was right. Marcello returned a couple of days later with his
grandfather’s shoes to resole; then he invited Rino to go for a drive. Then he
urged him to apply for a license, assuming the responsibility for getting him to
practice in the 1100. Maybe it wasn’t friendship, but the Solaras certainly had
taken a liking to Rino.
When  Lila,  ignorant  of  these  visits,  which  took  place  entirely  at  the
shoemaker’s shop, where she never went, heard about them, she, unlike her
father,  felt  an  increasing  worry.  First  she  remembered  the  battle  of  the
fireworks and thought: Rino hates the Solaras too much, it can’t be that he’ll
let himself be taken in. Then she had had to observe that Marcello’s attentions
were seducing her older brother even more than her parents. She now knew
Rino’s fragility, but still she was angry at the way the Solaras were getting into
his head, making him a kind of happy little monkey.
“What’s wrong with it?” I objected once.
“They’re dangerous.”
“Here everything is dangerous.”
“Did you see what Michele took out of the car, in Piazza dei Martiri?”
“No.”
“An iron bar.”
“The others had sticks.”
“You don’t see it, Lenù, but the bar was sharpened into a point: if he wanted
he could have thrust it into the chest, or the stomach, of one of those guys.”
“Well, you threatened Marcello with the shoemaker’s knife.”
At that point she grew irritated and said I didn’t understand. And probably it
was true. It was her brother, not mine; I liked to be logical, while she had
different needs, she wanted to get Rino away from that relationship. But as
soon  as  she  made  some  critical  remark  Rino  shut  her  up,  threatened  her,
sometimes beat her. And so things, willy-nilly, proceeded to the point where,
one evening in late June—I was at Lila’s house, I was helping her fold sheets, or
something, I don’t remember—the door opened and Rino entered, followed by
Marcello.
He had invited Solara to dinner, and Fernando, who had just returned from
the shop, very tired, at first was irritated, and then felt honored, and behaved
cordially. Not to mention Nunzia: she became agitated, thanked Marcello for
the three bottles of good wine that he had brought, pulled the other children
into the kitchen so they wouldn’t be disruptive.
I myself was involved with Lila in the preparations for dinner.
“I’ll put roach poison in it,” Lila said, furious, at the stove, and we laughed,
while Nunzia shut us up.
“He’s come to marry you,” I said to provoke her, “he’s going to ask your
father.”
“He is deceiving himself.”
“Why,” Nunzia asked anxiously, “if he likes you do you say no?”
“Ma, I already told him no.”
“Really?”
“Yes.”
“What are you saying?”
“It’s true,” I said in confirmation.
“Your father must never know, otherwise he’ll kill you.”
At dinner only Marcello spoke. It was clear that he had invited himself, and
Rino, who didn’t know how to say no to him, sat at the table nearly silent, or
laughed for no reason. Solara addressed himself mainly to Fernando, but never
neglected to pour water or wine for Nunzia, for Lila, for me. He said to him how
much  he  was  respected  in  the  neighborhood  because  he  was  such  a  good
cobbler. He said that his father had always spoken well of his skill. He said that
Rino had an unlimited admiration for his abilities as a shoemaker.
Fernando, partly because of the wine, was moved. He muttered something in
praise of Silvio Solara, and even went so far as to say that Rino was a good
worker and was becoming a good shoemaker. Then Marcello started to praise
the need for progress. He said that his grandfather had started with a cellar,
then his father had enlarged it, and today the bar-pastry shop Solara was what
it was, everybody knew it, people came from all over Naples to have coffee, eat
a pastry.
“What an exaggeration,” Lila exclaimed, and her father gave her a silencing
look.
But  Marcello  smiled  at  her  humbly  and  admitted,  “Yes,  maybe  I’m
exaggerating a little, but just to say that money has to circulate. You begin
with a cellar and from generation to generation you can go far.”
At this point, with Rino showing evident signs of uneasiness, he began to
praise the idea of making new shoes. And from that moment he began to look
at Lila as if in praising the energy of the generations he were praising her in
particular. He said: if someone feels capable, if he’s clever, if he can invent
good things, which are pleasing, why not try? He spoke in a nice, charming
dialect and as he spoke he never stopped staring at my friend. I felt, I saw that
he was in love as in the songs, that he would have liked to kiss her, that he
wanted to breathe her breath, that she would be able to make of him all she
wanted, that in his eyes she embodied all possible feminine qualities.
“I know,” Marcello concluded, “that your children made a very nice pair of
shoes, size 43, just my size.”
A long silence fell. Rino stared at his plate and didn’t dare look up at his
father.  Only  the  sound  of  the  goldfinch  at  the  window  could  be  heard.
Fernando said slowly, “Yes, they’re size 43.”
“I would very much like to see them, if you don’t mind?”
Fernando stammered, “I don’t know where they are. Nunzia, do you know?”
“She has them,” Rino said, indicating his sister.
“I did have them, yes, I had put them in the storeroom. But then Mamma
told me to clean it out the other day and I threw them away. Since no one liked
them.”
Rino said angrily, “You’re a liar, go and get the shoes right now.”
Fernando said nervously, “Go get the shoes, go on.”
Lila burst out, addressing her father, “How is it that now you want them? I
threw them away because you said you didn’t like them.”
Fernando pounded the table with his open hand, the wine trembled in the
glasses.
“Get up and go get the shoes, right now.”
Lila pushed away her chair, stood up.
“I threw them away,” she repeated weakly and left the room.
She didn’t come back.
The time passed in silence. The first to become alarmed was Marcello. He
said, with real concern, “Maybe I was wrong, I didn’t know that there were
problems.”
“There’s no problem,” Fernando said, and whispered to his wife, “Go see
what your daughter is doing.”
Nunzia  left  the  room.  When  she  came  back  she  was  embarrassed,  she
couldn’t find Lila. We looked for her all over the house, she wasn’t there. We
called her from the window: nothing. Marcello, desolate, took his leave. As
soon as he had gone Fernando shouted at his wife, “God’s truth, this time I’m
going to kill your daughter.”
Rino joined his father in the threat, Nunzia began to cry. I left almost on
tiptoe, frightened. But as soon as I closed the door and came out on the landing
Lila called me. She was on the top floor, I went up on tiptoe. She was huddled
next to the door to the terrace, in the shadows. She had the shoes in her lap,
for the first time I saw them finished. They shone in the feeble light of a bulb
hanging on an electrical cable. “What would it cost you to let him see them?” I
asked, confused.
She shook her head energetically. “I don’t even want him to touch them.”
But she was as if overwhelmed by her own extreme reaction. Her lower lip
trembled, something that never happened.
Gradually  I  persuaded  her  to  go  home,  she  couldn’t  stay  hiding  there
forever. I went with her, counting on the fact that my presence would protect
her.  But  there  were  shouts,  insults,  some  blows  just  the  same.  Fernando
screamed that on a whim she had made him look foolish in the eyes of an
important guest. Rino tore the shoes out of her hand, saying that they were
his, the work had been done by him. She began to cry, murmuring, “I worked
on them, too, but it would have been better if I’d never done it, you’ve become
a mad beast.” It was Nunzia who put an end to that torture. She turned pale
and in a voice that was not her usual voice she ordered her children, and even
her husband—she who was always so submissive—to stop it immediately, to
give the shoes to her, not to venture a single word if they didn’t want her to
jump out the window. Rino gave her the shoes and for the moment things
ended there. I slipped away.
28.
But Rino wouldn’t give in, and in the following days he continued to attack
his sister with words and fists. Every time Lila and I met I saw a new bruise.
After a while I felt that she was resigned. One morning he insisted that they go
out together, that she come with him to the shoemaker’s shop. On the way
they both sought, with wavy moves, to end the war. Rino said that he loved her
but  that  she  didn’t  love  anyone,  neither  her  parents  nor  her  siblings.  Lila
murmured, “What do you mean by love, what does love mean for our family?
Let’s hear.” Step by step, he revealed to her what he had in mind.
“If Marcello likes the shoes, Papa will change his mind.”
“I don’t think so.”
“Yes, he will. And if Marcello buys them, Papa will understand that your
designs are good, that they’re profitable, and he’ll have us start work.”
“The three of us?”
“He and I and maybe you, too. Papa is capable of making a pair of shoes,
completely finished, in four days, at most five. And I, if I work hard, I’ll show
you that I can do the same. We make them, we sell them, and we finance
ourselves.”
“Who do we sell them to, always Marcello Solara?”
“The  Solaras  market  them;  they  know  people  who  count.  They’ll  do  the
publicity for us.”
“They’ll do it free?”
“If they want a small percentage we’ll give it to them.”
“And why should they be content with a small percentage?”
“They’ve taken a liking to me.”
“The Solaras?”
“Yes.”
Lila sighed. “Just one thing: I’ll tell Papa and see what he thinks.”
“Don’t you dare.”
“This way or not at all.”
Rino was silent, very nervous.
“All right. Anyway, you speak, you can speak better.”
That evening, at dinner, in front of her brother, whose face was fiery red,
Lila said to Fernando that Marcello not only had shown great curiosity about
the  shoe  enterprise  but  might  even  be  interested  in  buying  the  shoes  for
himself,  and  that  in  fact,  if  he  was  enthusiastic  about  the  matter  from  a
commercial point of view, he would advertise the product in the circles he
frequented, in exchange, naturally, for a small percentage of the sales.
“This I said,” Rino explained with lowered eyes, “not Marcello.”
Fernando looked at his wife: Lila understood that they had talked about it
and had already, secretly, reached a conclusion.
“Tomorrow,” he said, “I’ll put your shoes in the shop window. If someone
wants to see them, wants to try them, wants to buy them, whatever fucking
thing, he has to talk to me, I am the one who decides.”
A few days later I passed by the shop. Rino was working, Fernando was
working, both heads bent over the work. I saw in the window, among boxes of
shoe polish and laces, the beautiful, elegant shoes made by the Cerullos. A sign
pasted  to  the  window,  certainly  written  by  Rino,  said,  pompously:  “Shoes
handmade by the Cerullos here.” Father and son waited for good luck to arrive.
But Lila was skeptical, sulky. She had no faith in the ingenuous hypothesis of
her  brother  and  was  afraid  of  the  indecipherable  agreement  between  her
father and mother. In other words she expected bad things. A week passed, and
no  one  showed  the  least  interest  in  the  shoes  in  the  window,  not  even
Marcello. Only because he was cornered by Rino, in fact almost dragged to the
shop, did Solara glance at them, but as if he had other things on his mind. He
tried  them,  of  course,  but  said  they  were  a  little  tight,  took  them  off
immediately, and disappeared without even a word of compliment, as if he had
a stomachache and had to hurry home. Disappointment of father and son. But
two minutes later Marcello reappeared. Rino jumped up, beaming, and took his
hand as if some agreement, by that pure and simple reappearance, had already
been made. But Marcello ignored him and turned directly to Fernando. He said,
all in one breath: “I have very serious intentions, Don Fernà. I would like the
hand of your daughter Lina.”
29.
Rino reacted to that turn with a violent fever that kept him away from work
for days. When, abruptly, the fever went down, he had disturbing symptoms:
he got out of bed in the middle of the night, and, while still sleeping, silent, and
extremely agitated, he went to the door and struggled to open it, with his eyes
wide open. Nunzia and Lila, frightened, dragged him back to bed.
Fernando, however, who with his wife had immediately guessed Marcello’s
true  intentions,  spoke  with  his  daughter  calmly.  He  explained  to  her  that
Marcello Solara’s proposal was important not only for her future but for that of
the whole family. He told her that she was still a child and didn’t have to say
yes immediately, but added that he, as her father, advised her to consent. A
long engagement at home would slowly get her used to the marriage.
Lila answered with equal tranquility that rather than be engaged to Marcello
Solara and marry him she would go and drown herself in the pond. A great
quarrel arose, but she didn’t change her mind.
I  was  stunned  by  the  news.  I  knew  that  Marcello  wanted  to  be  Lila’s
boyfriend at all costs, but it would never have entered my mind that at our age
one could receive a proposal of marriage. And yet Lila had received one, and
she wasn’t yet fifteen, she hadn’t yet had a secret boyfriend, had never kissed
anyone. I sided with her immediately. Get married? To Marcello Solara? Maybe
even have children? No, absolutely no. I encouraged her to fight that new war
against her father and swore I would support her, even if he had already lost
his composure and now was threatening her, saying that for her own good he
would break every bone in her body if she didn’t accept a proposal of that
importance.
But I couldn’t stay with her. In the middle of July something happened that I
should  have  thought  of  but  that  instead  caught  me  unawares  and
overwhelmed  me.  One  late  afternoon,  after  the  usual  walk  through  the
neighborhood with Lila, discussing what was happening to her and how to get
out of it, I came home and my sister Elisa opened the door. She said in a state of
excitement that in the dining room was her teacher, that is, Maestra Oliviero.
She was talking to our mother.
I  looked  timidly  into  the  room,  my  mother  stammered,  in  annoyance,
“Maestra Oliviero says you need to rest, you’re worn out.”
I looked at the teacher without understanding. She seemed the one in need
of  rest,  she  was  pale  and  her  face  was  puffy.  She  said  to  me,  “My  cousin
responded just yesterday: you can go to her in Ischia, and stay there until the
end of August. She’ll be happy to have you, you just have to help a little in the
house.”
She spoke to me as if she were my mother and as if my mother, the real one,
with  the  injured  leg  and  the  wandering  eye,  were  only  a  disposable  living
being, and as such not to be taken into consideration. Nor did she go away after
that communication,  but  stayed  another  hour  showing  me  one  by  one  the
books that she had brought to lend to me. She explained to me which I should
read first and which after, she made me swear that before reading them I
would make covers for them, she ordered me to give them all back at the end
of the summer without a single dog-ear. My mother endured all this patiently.
She  sat  attentively,  even  though  her  wandering  eye  gave  her  a  dazed
expression. She exploded only when the teacher, finally, took her leave, with a
disdainful farewell and not even a caress for my sister, who had counted on it
and would have been proud. She turned to me, overwhelmed by bitterness for
the humiliation that it seemed to her she had suffered on my account. She said,
“The signorina must go and rest on Ischia, the signorina is too exhausted. Go
and make dinner, go on, or I’ll hit you.”
Two days later, however, after taking my measurements and rapidly making
me a bathing suit—I don’t know where she copied it from—she herself took me
to the ferry. Along the street to the port, while she bought me the ticket, and
then while she waited for me to get on, she besieged me with warnings. What
frightened her most was the crossing. “Let’s hope the sea isn’t rough,” she said
almost to herself, and swore that when I was a child she had taken me to
Coroglio every day, so my catarrh would dry out, and that the sea was beautiful
and  I  had  learned  to  swim.  But  I  didn’t  remember  Coroglio  or  the  sea  or
learning to swim, and I told her. And her tone became resentful, as if to say
that if I drowned it would not be her fault—that what she was supposed to do
to  avoid  it  she  had  done—but  because  of  my  own  forgetfulness.  Then  she
ordered me not to go far from the shore even when the sea was calm, and to
stay home if it was rough or there was a red flag. “Especially,” she said, “if you
have a full stomach or your period, you mustn’t even get your feet wet.” Before
she left she asked an old sailor to keep an eye on me. When the ferry left the
wharf I was terrified and at the same time happy. For the first time I was
leaving home, I was going on a journey, a journey by sea. The large body of my
mother—along with the neighborhood, and Lila’s troubles—grew distant, and
vanished.
30.
I blossomed. The teacher’s cousin was called Nella Incardo and she lived in
Barano. I arrived in the town by bus, and found the house easily. Nella was a
big,  kind  woman,  very  lively,  talkative,  unmarried.  She  rented  rooms  to
vacationers, keeping for herself one small room and the kitchen. I would sleep
in the kitchen. I had to make up my bed in the evening and take it all apart
(boards,  legs,  mattress)  in  the  morning.  I  discovered  that  I  had  some
mandatory obligations: to get up at six-thirty, make breakfast for her and her
guests—when I arrived there was an English couple with two children—tidy up
and wash cups and bowls, set the table for dinner, and wash the dishes before
going to sleep. Otherwise I was free. I could sit on the terrace and read with the
sea in front of me, or walk along a steep white road toward a long, wide, dark
beach that was called Spiaggia dei Maronti.
In the beginning, after all the fears that my mother had inoculated me with
and  all  the  troubles  I  had  with  my  body,  I  spent  the  time  on  the  terrace,
dressed, writing a letter to Lila every day, each one filled with questions, clever
remarks, lively descriptions of the island. But one morning Nella made fun of
me, saying, “What are you doing like this? Put on your bathing suit.” When I
put it on she burst out laughing, she thought it was old-fashioned. She sewed
me one that she said was more modern, very low over the bosom, more fitted
around the bottom, of a beautiful blue. I tried it on and she was enthusiastic,
she said it was time I went to the sea, enough of the terrace.
The next day, amid a thousand fears and a thousand curiosities, I set out
with a towel and a book toward the Maronti. The trip seemed very long, I met
no one coming up or going down. The beach was endless and deserted, with a
granular sand that rustled at every step. The sea gave off an intense odor and a
sharp, monotonous sound.
I stood looking for a long time at that great mass of water. Then I sat on the
towel, uncertain what to do. Finally I got up and stuck my feet in. How had it
happened that I lived in a city like Naples and never thought, not once, of
swimming in the sea? And yet it was so. I advanced cautiously, letting the
water rise from my feet to my ankles, to my thighs. Then I missed a step and
sank. Terrified, I gasped for air, swallowed water, returned to the surface, to
the air. I realized that it came naturally to move my feet and arms in a certain
way to keep myself afloat. So I knew how to swim. My mother really had taken
me to the sea as a child and there, while she took the sand treatments, I had
learned to swim. I saw her in a flash, younger, less ravaged, sitting on the black
sand in the midday sun, in a flowered white dress, her good leg covered to the
knee by her dress, the injured one completely buried in the burning sand.
The seawater and the sun rapidly erased the inflammation of the acne from
my face. I burned, I darkened. I waited for letters from Lila, we had promised
when we said goodbye, but none came. I practiced speaking English a little
with the family at Nella’s. They understood that I wanted to learn and spoke to
me with increasing kindness, and I improved quite a lot. Nella, who was always
cheerful,  encouraged  me,  and  I  began  to  interpret  for  her.  Meanwhile  she
didn’t miss any opportunity to compliment me. She made me enormous meals,
and she was a really good cook. She said that I had been a stick when I arrived
and now, thanks to her treatment, I was beautiful.
In other words, the last ten days of July gave me a sense of well-being that I
had  never  known  before.  I  felt  a  sensation  that  later  in  my  life  was  often
repeated:  the  joy  of  the  new.  I  liked  everything:  getting  up  early,  making
breakfast, tidying up, walking in Barano, taking the road to the Maronti, uphill
and down, lying in the sun and reading, going for a swim, returning to my
book. I did not feel homesick for my father, my brothers and sister, my mother,
the streets of the neighborhood, the public gardens. I missed only Lila, Lila who
didn’t answer my letters. I was afraid of what was happening to her, good or
bad, in my absence. It was an old fear, a fear that has never left me: the fear
that, in losing pieces of her life, mine lost intensity and importance. And the
fact that she didn’t answer emphasized that preoccupation. However hard I
tried in my letters to communicate the privilege of the days in Ischia, my river
of words and her silence seemed to demonstrate that my life was splendid but
uneventful, which left me time to write to her every day, while hers was dark
but full.
At the end of July Nella told me that on the first of August, in place of the
English, a Neapolitan family was to arrive. It was the second year they had
come. Very respectable people, very polite, refined: especially the husband, a
true gentleman who always said wonderful things to her. And then the older
son, really a fine boy: tall, thin but strong, this year he was seventeen. “You
won’t be alone anymore,” she said to me, and I was embarrassed, immediately
filled with anxiety about this young man who was arriving, fearful that we
wouldn’t be able to speak two words to each other, that he wouldn’t like me.
As soon as the English departed—they left me a couple of novels to practice
my reading, and their address, so that if I ever decided to go to England I
should  go  and  see  them—Nella  had  me  help  her  clean  the  rooms,  do  the
laundry, remake the beds. I was glad to do it, and as I was washing the floor she
called to me from the kitchen: “How clever you are, you can even read in
English. Are the books you brought not enough?”
And  she  went  on  praising  me  from  a  distance,  in  a  loud  voice,  for  how
disciplined I was, how sensible, for how I read all day and also at night. When I
joined her in the kitchen I found her with a book in her hand. She said that the
man who was arriving the next day had written it himself. Nella kept it on her
night table, every evening she read a poem, first to herself and then aloud.
Now she knew them all by heart.
“Look what he wrote to me,” she said, and handed me the book.
It was Attempts at Serenity, by Donato Sarratore. The dedication read: “To
darling Nella, and to her jams.”
31.
I immediately wrote to Lila: pages and pages of apprehension, joy, the wish
to flee, intense foreshadowing of the moment when I would see Nino Sarratore,
I would walk to the Maronti with him, we would swim, we would look at the
moon and the stars, we would sleep under the same roof. All I could think of
was that intense moment when, holding his brother by the hand, a century ago
—ah, how much time had passed—he had declared his love. We were children
then: now I felt grown-up, almost old.
The next day I went to the bus stop to help the guests carry their bags. I was
very agitated, I hadn’t slept all night. The bus arrived, stopped, the travelers
got  out.  I  recognized  Donato  Sarratore,  I  recognized  Lidia,  his  wife,  I
recognized Marisa, although she was very changed, I recognized Clelia, who
was always by herself, I recognized little Pino, who was now a solemn kid, and I
imagined that the capricious child who was annoying his mother must be the
one who, the last time I had seen the entire Sarratore family, was still in a
carriage, under the projectiles hurled by Melina. But I didn’t see Nino.
Marisa threw her arms around my neck with an enthusiasm I would never
have expected: in all those years I had never, absolutely never, thought of her,
while she said she had often thought of me with great nostalgia. When she
alluded to the days in the neighborhood and told her parents that I was the
daughter of Greco, the porter, Lidia, her mother, made a grimace of distaste
and hurried to grab her little child to scold him for something or other, while
Donato Sarratore saw to the luggage without even a remark like: How is your
father.
I felt depressed. The Sarratores settled in their rooms, and I went to the sea
with  Marisa,  who  knew  the  Maronti  and  all  Ischia  well,  and  was  already
impatient, she wanted to go to the Port, where there was more activity, and to
Forio, and to Casamicciola, anywhere but Barano, which according to her was a
morgue.  She  told  me  that  she  was  studying  to  be  a  secretary  and  had  a
boyfriend whom I would meet soon because he was coming to see her, but
secretly. Finally she told me something that tugged at my heart. She knew all
about me, she knew that I went to the high school, that I was very clever, and
that Gino, the pharmacist’s son, was my boyfriend.
“Who told you?”
“My brother.”
So Nino had recognized me, so he knew who I was, so it was not inattention
but perhaps timidity, perhaps uneasiness, perhaps shame for the declaration
he had made to me as a child.
“I stopped going with Gino ages ago,” I said. “Your brother isn’t very well
informed.”
“All he thinks about is studying, it’s already a lot that he told me about you,
usually he’s got his head in the clouds.”
“He’s not coming?”
“He’ll come when Papa leaves.”
She spoke to me very critically about Nino. He had no feelings. He was never
excited about anything, he didn’t get angry but he wasn’t nice, either. He was
closed up in himself, all he cared about was studying. He didn’t like anything,
he was cold-blooded. The only person who managed to get to him a little was
his father. Not that they quarreled, he was a respectful and obedient son. But
Marisa knew very well that Nino couldn’t stand his father. Whereas she adored
him. He was the best and most intelligent man in the world.
“Is your father staying long? When is he leaving?” I asked her with perhaps
excessive interest.
“Just three days. He has to work.”
“And Nino arrives in three days?”
“Yes. He pretended that he had to help the family of a friend of his move.”
“And it’s not true?”
“He doesn’t have any friends. And anyway he wouldn’t carry that stone from
here to there even for my mamma, the only person he loves even a little,
imagine if he’s going to help a friend.”
We went swimming, we dried off walking along the shore. Laughing, she
pointed out to me something I had never noticed. At the end of the black beach
were some motionless white forms. She dragged me, still laughing, over the
burning sand and at a certain point it became clear that they were people.
Living people, covered with mud. It was some sort of treatment, we didn’t
know  for  what.  We  lay  on  the  sand,  rolling  over,  shoving  each  other,
pretending  to  be  mummies  like  the  people  down  the  beach.  We  had  fun
playing, then went swimming again.
In the evening the Sarratore family had dinner in the kitchen and invited
Nella and me to join them. It was a wonderful evening. Lidia never mentioned
the neighborhood, but, once her first impulse of hostility had passed, she asked
about me. When Marisa told her that I was very studious and went to the same
school  as  Nino  she  became  particularly  nice.  The  most  congenial  of  all,
however, was Donato Sarratore. He loaded Nella with compliments, praised my
scholastic record, was extremely considerate toward Lidia, played with Ciro,
the baby, wanted to clean up himself, kept me from washing the dishes.
I studied him carefully and he seemed different from the way I remembered
him. He was thinner, certainly, and had grown a mustache, but apart from his
looks there was something more that I couldn’t understand and that had to do
with his behavior. Maybe he seemed to me more paternal than my father and
uncommonly courteous.
This sensation intensified in the next two days. Sarratore, when we went to
the beach, wouldn’t allow Lidia or us two girls to carry anything. He loaded
himself up with the umbrella, the bags with towels and food for lunch, on the
way and, equally, on the way back, when the road was all uphill. He gave the
bundles to us only when Ciro whined and insisted on being carried. He had a
lean body, without much hair. He wore a bathing suit of an indefinable color,
not of fabric, it seemed a light wool. He swam a lot but didn’t go far out, he
wanted to show me and Marisa how to swim freestyle. His daughter swam like
him, with the same very careful, slow arm strokes, and I immediately began to
imitate them. He expressed himself more in Italian than in dialect and tended
somewhat  insistently,  especially  with  me,  to  come  out  with  convoluted
sentences  and  unusual  phrasings.  He  summoned  us  cheerfully,  me,  Lidia,
Marisa, to run back and forth on the beach with him to tone our muscles, and
meanwhile  he  made  us  laugh  with  funny  faces,  little  cries,  comical  walks.
When he swam with his wife they stayed together, floating, they talked in low
voices, and often laughed. The day he left, I was sorry as Marisa was sorry, as
Lidia  was  sorry,  as  Nella  was  sorry.  The  house,  though  it  echoed  with  our
voices, seemed silent, a tomb. The only consolation was that finally Nino would
arrive.
32.
I tried to suggest to Marisa that we should go and wait for him at the Port,
but  she  refused,  she  said  her  brother  didn’t  deserve  that  attention.  Nino
arrived in the evening. Tall, thin, in a blue shirt, dark pants, and sandals, with a
bag over his shoulder, he showed not the least emotion at finding me in Ischia,
in that house, so I thought that in Naples they must have a telephone, that
Marisa had found a way of warning him. At dinner he spoke in monosyllables,
and he didn’t appear at breakfast. He woke up late, we went late to the beach,
and he carried little or nothing. He dove in immediately, decisively, and swam
out to sea effortlessly, without the ostentatious virtuosity of his father. He
disappeared: I was afraid he had drowned, but neither Marisa nor Lidia was
worried. He reappeared almost two hours later and began reading, smoking
one cigarette after another. He read for the entire day, without saying a word
to us, arranging the cigarette butts in the sand in a row, two by two. I also
started reading, refusing the invitation of Marisa to walk along the shore. At
dinner he ate in a hurry and went out. I cleared, I washed the dishes thinking
of him. I made my bed in the kitchen and started reading again, waiting for
him to come back. I read until one, then fell asleep with the light on and the
book open on my chest. In the morning I woke up with the light off and the
book closed. I thought it must have been him and felt a flare of love in my veins
that I had never experienced before.
In a few days things improved. I realized that every so often he would look at
me and then turn away. I asked him what he was reading, I told him what I was
reading. We talked about our reading, annoying Marisa. At first he seemed to
listen  attentively,  then,  just  like  Lila,  he  started  talking  and  went  on,
increasingly under the spell of his own arguments. Since I wanted him to be
aware of my intelligence I endeavored to interrupt him, to say what I thought,
but it was difficult, he seemed content with my presence only if I was silently
listening, which I quickly resigned myself to doing. Besides, he said things that
I could never have thought, or at least said, with the same assurance, and he
said them in a strong, engaging Italian.
Marisa  sometimes  threw  balls  of  sand  at  us,  and  sometimes  burst  in,
shouting “Stop it, who cares about this Dostoyevsky, who gives a damn about
the Karamazovs.” Then Nino abruptly broke off and walked along the shore,
head lowered, until he became a tiny speck. I spent some time with Marisa
talking about her boyfriend, who couldn’t come to see her, which made her
cry. Meanwhile I felt better and better, I couldn’t believe that life could be like
this. Maybe, I thought, the girls of Via dei Mille—the one dressed all in green,
for example—had a life like this.
Every three or four days Donato Sarratore returned, but stayed at most for
twenty-four  hours,  then  left.  He  said  that  all  he  could  think  of  was  the
thirteenth of August, when he would settle in Barano for two full weeks. As
soon  as  his  father  appeared,  Nino  became  a  shadow.  He  ate,  disappeared,
reappeared late at night, and didn’t say a single word. He listened to him with a
compliant sort of half smile, and whatever his father uttered he gave no sign of
agreement  but  neither  did  he  oppose  it.  The  only  time  he  said  something
definite and explicit was when Donato mentioned the longed-for thirteenth of
August.  Then,  a  moment  later,  he  reminded  his  mother—his  mother,  not
Donato—that right after the mid-August holiday he had to return to Naples
because he had arranged with some school friends to meet—they planned to
get together in a country house in the Avellinese—and begin their summer
homework. “It’s a lie,” Marisa whispered to me, “he has no homework.” But his
mother praised him, and even his father. In fact, Donato started off right away
on one of his favorite topics: Nino was fortunate to be able to study; he himself
had barely finished the second year of vocational school when he had had to go
to work, but if he had been able to study as his son was doing, who knows
where he might have gone. And he concluded, “Study, Ninù, go on, make Papa
proud, and do what I was unable to do.”
That tone bothered Nino more than anything else. Sometimes, just to get
away, he went so far as to invite Marisa and me to go out with him. He would
say gloomily to his parents, as if we had been tormenting him, “They want to
get an ice cream, they want to go for a little walk, I’ll take them.”
Marisa hurried eagerly to get ready and I regretted that I always had the
same shabby old dress. But it seemed to me that he didn’t much care if I was
pretty or ugly. As soon as we left the house he started talking, which made
Marisa uncomfortable, she said it would have been better for her to stay home.
I, however, hung on Nino’s every word. It greatly astonished me that, in the
tumult of the Port, among the young and not so young men who looked at
Marisa  and  me  purposefully,  he  showed  not  a  trace  of  that  disposition  to
violence that Pasquale, Rino, Antonio, Enzo showed when they went out with
us and someone gave us one glance too many. As an intimidating guardian of
our bodies he had little value. Maybe because he was engrossed in the things
that were going on in his head, by an eagerness to talk to me about them, he
would let anything happen to us.
That was how Marisa made friends with some boys from Forio, they came to
see her at Barano, and she brought them with us to the beach at the Maronti.
And so the three of us began to go out every evening. We all went to the Port,
but once we arrived she went off with her new friends (when in the world
would Pasquale have been so free with Carmela, Antonio with Ada?) and we
walked along the sea. Then we met her around ten and returned home.
One evening, as soon as we were alone, Nino said suddenly that as a boy he
had greatly envied the relationship between Lila and me. He saw us from a
distance, always together, always talking, and he would have liked to be friends
with us, but never had the courage. Then he smiled and said, “You remember
the declaration I made to you?”
“Yes.”
“I liked you a lot.”
I blushed, I whispered stupidly, “Thank you.”
“I thought we would become engaged and we would all three be together
forever, you, me, and your friend.”
“Together?”
He smiled at himself as a child.
“I didn’t understand anything about engagements.”
Then he asked me about Lila.
“Did she go on studying?”
“No.”
“What does she do?”
“She helps her parents.”
“She was so smart, you couldn’t keep up with her, she made my head a blur.”
He said it just that way—she made my head a blur—and if at first I had been a
little disappointed because he had said that his declaration of love had been
only an attempt to introduce himself into my and Lila’s relationship, this time I
suffered in an obvious way, I felt a real pain in my chest.
“She’s not like that anymore,” I said. “She’s changed.”
And I felt an urge to add, “Have you heard how the teachers at school talk
about me?” Luckily I managed to restrain myself. But, after that conversation, I
stopped writing to Lila: I had trouble telling her what was happening to me,
and anyway she wouldn’t answer. I devoted myself instead to taking care of
Nino. I knew that he woke up late and I invented excuses of every sort not to
have breakfast with the others. I waited for him, I went to the beach with him,
I got his things ready, I carried them, we went swimming together. But when
he went out to sea I didn’t feel able to follow, I returned to the shoreline to
watch apprehensively the wake he left, the dark speck of his head. I became
anxious if I lost him, I was happy when I saw him return. In other words I loved
him and knew it and was content to love him.
But meanwhile the mid-August holiday approached. One evening I told him
that I didn’t want to go to the Port, I would rather walk to the Maronti, there
was a full moon. I hoped that he would come with me, rather than take his
sister,  who  was  eager  to  go  to  the  Port,  where  by  now  she  had  a  sort  of
boyfriend  with  whom,  she  told  me,  she  exchanged  kisses  and  embraces,
betraying the boyfriend in Naples. Instead he went with Marisa. As a matter of
principle, I set out on the rocky road that led to the beach. The sand was cold,
gray-black in the moonlight, the sea scarcely breathed. There was not a living
soul and I began to weep with loneliness. What was I, who was I? I felt pretty
again, my pimples were gone, the sun and the sea had made me slimmer, and
yet the person I liked and whom I wished to be liked by showed no interest in
me. What signs did I carry, what fate? I thought of the neighborhood as of a
whirlpool from which any attempt at escape was an illusion. Then I heard the
rustle of sand, I turned, I saw the shadow of Nino. He sat down beside me. He
had to go back and get his sister in an hour. I felt he was nervous, he was
hitting the sand with the heel of his left foot. He didn’t talk about books, he
began suddenly speaking of his father.
“I will devote my life,” he said, as if he were speaking of a mission, “to trying
not to resemble him.”
“He’s a nice man.”
“Everyone says that.”
“And so?”
He had a sarcastic expression that for a few seconds made him ugly.
“How is Melina?”
I looked at him in astonishment. I had been very careful never to mention
Melina in those days of intense conversation, and here he was talking about
her.
“All right.”
“He was her lover. He knew perfectly well that she was a fragile woman, but
he took her just the same, out of pure vanity. Out of vanity he would hurt
anyone  and  never  feel  responsible.  Since  he  is  convinced  that  he  makes
everyone happy, he thinks that everything is forgiven him. He goes to Mass
every Sunday. He treats us children with respect. He is always considerate of
my mother. But he betrays her continually. He’s a hypocrite, he makes me
sick.”
I didn’t know what to say. In the neighborhood terrible things could happen,
fathers and sons often came to blows, like Rino and Fernando, for example. But
the violence of those few carefully constructed sentences hurt me. Nino hated
his father with all his strength, that was why he talked so much about the
Karamazovs. But that wasn’t the point. What disturbed me profoundly was that
Donato Sarratore, as far as I had seen with my own eyes, heard with my own
ears, was not repellent, he was the father that every girl, every boy should
want, and Marisa in fact adored him. Besides, if his sin was the capacity to love,
I didn’t see anything particularly evil, even of my father my mother would say
angrily, Who knows what he had been up to. As a result those lashing phrases,
that cutting tone seemed to me terrible. I murmured, “He and Melina were
overcome by passion, like Dido and Aeneas. These are things that are hurtful,
but also very moving.”
“He swore faithfulness to my mother before God,” he exclaimed suddenly.
“He doesn’t respect her or God.” And he jumped up in agitation, his eyes were
beautiful, shining. “Not even you understand me,” he said, walking off with
long strides.
I caught up to him, my heart pounding.
“I understand you,” I murmured, and cautiously took his arm.
We had scarcely touched, the contact burned my fingers, I immediately let
go. He bent over and kissed me on the lips, a very light kiss.
“I’m leaving tomorrow,” he said.
“But the thirteenth is the day after tomorrow.”
He didn’t answer. We went back to Barano speaking of books, then we went
to get Marisa at the Port. I felt his mouth on mine.
33.
I cried all night, in the silent kitchen. I fell asleep at dawn. Nella came to
wake me and reproached me, she said that Nino had wanted to have breakfast
on the terrace in order not to disturb me. He had left.
I dressed in a hurry, and she saw that I was suffering. “Go on,” she yielded,
finally, “maybe you’ll be in time.” I ran to the Port hoping to get there before
the ferry left, but the boat was already out at sea.
Some  difficult  days  passed.  Cleaning  the  rooms  I  found  a  blue  paper
bookmark that belonged to Nino and I hid it among my things. At night, in my
bed in the kitchen, I sniffed it, kissed it, licked it with the tip of my tongue and
cried. My own desperate passion moved me and my weeping fed on itself.
Then Donato Sarratore arrived for his two-week holiday. He was sorry that
his  son  had  left,  but  pleased  that  he  had  joined  his  schoolmates  in  the
Avellinese to study. “He’s a truly serious boy,” he said to me, “like you. I’m
proud of him, as I imagine your father must be proud of you.”
The presence of that reassuring man calmed me. He wanted to meet Marisa’s
new friends, he invited them one evening to have a big bonfire on the beach.
He himself gathered all the wood he could find and piled it up, and he stayed
with us until late. The boy with whom Marisa was carrying on a half-steady
relationship strummed a guitar and Donato sang, he had a beautiful voice.
Then, late at night, he himself began to play and he played well, he improvised
dance tunes. Some began to dance, Marisa first.
I looked at that man and thought: he and his son have not even a feature in
common. Nino is tall, he has a delicate face, the forehead buried under black
hair,  the  mouth  always  half-closed,  with  inviting  lips;  Donato  instead  is  of
average height, his features are pronounced, he has a receding hairline, his
mouth is compact, almost without lips. Nino has brooding eyes that see beyond
things and persons and seem to be frightened; Donato has a gaze that is always
receptive, that adores the appearance of every thing or person and is always
smiling on them. Nino has something that’s eating him inside, like Lila, and it’s
a gift and a suffering; they aren’t content, they never give in, they fear what is
happening around them; this man, no, he appears to love every manifestation
of life, as if every lived second had an absolute clarity.
From that evening on, Nino’s father seemed to me a solid remedy not only
against the darkness into which his son had driven me, departing after an
almost imperceptible kiss, but also—I realized with amazement—against the
darkness into which Lila had driven me by never responding to my letters. She
and Nino scarcely know each other, I thought, they have never been friends,
and yet now they seem to me very similar: they have no need of anything or
anyone,  and  they  always  know  what’s  right  and  what  isn’t.  But  if  they’re
wrong? What is especially terrible about Marcello Solara, what is especially
terrible about Donato Sarratore? I didn’t understand. I loved both Lila and
Nino, and now in a different way I missed them, but I was grateful to that hated
father, who made me, and all us children, important, who gave us joy and
peace that night at the Maronti. Suddenly I was glad that neither of the two
was present on the island.
I began reading again, I wrote a last letter to Lila, in which I said that, since
she  hadn’t  ever  answered  me,  I  wouldn’t  write  anymore.  I  bound  myself
instead to the Sarratore family, I felt I was the sister of Marisa, Pinuccio, and
little Ciro, who now loved me tremendously and with me, only with me, wasn’t
naughty but played happily; we went looking for shells together. Lidia, whose
hostility had conclusively turned into sympathy and fondness, often praised
me for the precision that I put into everything: setting the table, cleaning the
rooms, washing the dishes, entertaining the baby, reading and studying. One
morning she made me try on a sundress that was too tight for her, and, since
Nella and even Sarratore, called urgently to give an opinion, thought it very
becoming, she gave it to me. At certain moments she even seemed to prefer me
to Marisa. She said, “She’s lazy and vain, I brought her up badly, she doesn’t
study; whereas you are so sensible about everything.” “Just like Nino,” she
added once, “except that you’re sunny and he is always irritable.” But Donato,
hearing those criticisms, responded sharply, and began to praise his oldest son.
“He’s as good as gold,” he said, and with a look asked me for confirmation and I
nodded yes with great conviction.
After his long swims Donato lay beside me to dry in the sun and read his
newspaper, Roma, the only thing he read. I was struck by the fact that someone
who wrote poems, who had even collected them in a volume, never opened a
book. He hadn’t brought any with him and was never curious about mine. At
times he read aloud to me some passage from an article, words and sentiments
that  would  have  made  Pasquale  extremely  angry  and  certainly  Professor
Galiani, too. But I was silent, I didn’t feel like arguing with such a kind and
courteous person, and spoiling the great esteem he had for me. Once he read
me an entire article, from beginning to end, and every two lines he turned to
Lidia smiling, and Lidia responded with a complicit smile. At the end he asked
me, “Did you like it?”
It was an article on the speed of train travel as opposed to the speed of travel
in the past, by horse carriage or on foot, along country lanes. It was written in
high-flown sentences that he read with great feeling.
“Yes, very much,” I said.
“See who wrote it: what do you read here?”
He held it out toward me, put the paper under my eyes. With emotion, I
read: “Donato Sarratore.”
Lidia burst out laughing and so did he. They left me on the beach to keep an
eye on Ciro while they swam in their usual way, staying close to each other and
whispering. I looked at them, I thought, Poor Melina, but without bitterness
toward Sarratore. Assuming that Nino was right and that there really had been
something between the two of them; assuming, in other words, that Sarratore
really had betrayed Lidia, now, even more than before—now that I knew him
somewhat—I couldn’t feel that he was guilty, especially since it seemed to me
that  not  even  his  wife  felt  he  was  guilty,  although  at  the  time  she  had
compelled him to leave the neighborhood. As for Melina, I understood her, too.
She had felt the joy of love for that so far from ordinary man—a conductor on
the railroad but also a poet, a journalist—and her fragile mind had been unable
to readjust to the rough normality of life without him. I was satisfied with
these thoughts. I was pleased with everything, in those days, with my love for
Nino, with my sadness, with the affection that I felt surrounded by, with my
own capacity to read, think, reflect in solitude.
34.
Then, at the end of August, when that extraordinary period was about to
come to an end, two important things happened, suddenly, on the same day. It
was the twenty-fifth, I remember with precision because my birthday fell on
that day. I got up, I prepared breakfast for everyone, at the table I said, “Today
I’m fifteen,” and as I said it I remembered that Lila had turned fifteen on the
eleventh, but, in the grip of so many emotions, I hadn’t remembered. Although
customarily  it  was  the  saint’s  day  that  was  celebrated—birthdays  were
considered irrelevant at the time—the Sarratores and Nella insisted on having
a party, in the evening. I was pleased. They went to get ready for the beach, I
began to clear the table, when the postman arrived.
I stuck my head out the window, the postman said there was a letter for
Greco. I ran down with my heart pounding. I ruled out the possibility that my
parents had written to me. Was it a letter from Lila, from Nino? It was from
Lila. I tore open the envelope. There were five closely written pages, and I
devoured them, but I understood almost nothing of what I read. It may seem
strange today, and yet it really was so: even before I was overwhelmed by the
contents, what struck me was that the writing contained Lila’s voice. Not only
that. From the first lines I thought of The Blue Fairy, the only text of hers that I
had  read,  apart  from  our  elementary-school  homework,  and  I  understood
what, at the time, I had liked so much. There was, in The Blue Fairy, the same
quality that struck me now: Lila was able to speak through writing; unlike me
when I wrote, unlike Sarratore in his articles and poems, unlike even many
writers I had read and was reading, she expressed herself in sentences that
were well constructed, and without error, even though she had stopped going
to school, but—further—she left no trace of effort, you weren’t aware of the
artifice of the written word. I read and I saw her, I heard her. The voice set in
the writing overwhelmed me, enthralled me even more than when we talked
face to face: it was completely cleansed of the dross of speech, of the confusion
of  the  oral;  it  had  the  vivid  orderliness  that  I  imagined  would  belong  to
conversation if one were so fortunate as to be born from the head of Zeus and
not from the Grecos, the Cerullos. I was ashamed of the childish pages I had
written to her, the overwrought tone, the frivolity, the false cheer, the false
grief. Who knows what Lila had thought of me. I felt contempt and bitterness
toward Professor Gerace, who had deluded me by giving me a nine in Italian.
The first effect of that letter was to make me feel, at the age of fifteen, on the
day of my birthday, a fraud. School, with me, had made a mistake and proof
was there, in Lila’s letter.
Then, slowly, the contents reached me as well. Lila sent me good wishes for
my birthday. She hadn’t written because she was pleased that I was having fun
in the sun, that I was comfortable with the Sarratores, that I loved Nino, that I
liked Ischia so much, the beach of the Maronti, and she didn’t want to spoil my
vacation with her terrible stories. But now she had felt an urge to break the
silence. Immediately after my departure Marcello Solara, with the consent of
Fernando, had begun to appear at dinner every night. He came at eight-thirty
and  left  exactly  at  ten-thirty.  He  always  brought  something:  pastries,
chocolates, sugar, coffee. She didn’t touch anything, she kept him at a distance,
he looked at her in silence. After the first week of that torture, since Lila acted
as if he weren’t there, he had decided to surprise her. He showed up in the
morning with a big fellow, all sweaty, who deposited in the dining room an
enormous cardboard box. Out of the box emerged an object that we all knew
about but that very few in the neighborhood had in their house: a television,
an apparatus, that is, with a screen on which one saw images, just as at the
cinema, but the images came not from a projector but rather from the air, and
inside the apparatus was a mysterious tube that was called a cathode. Because
of that tube, mentioned continuously by the large sweaty man, the machine
hadn’t worked for days. Then, after various attempts, it had started, and now
half the neighborhood, including my mother, my father, and my sister and
brothers, came to the Cerullo house to see the miracle. Not Rino. He was better,
the  fever  had  definitely  gone,  but  he  no  longer  spoke  to  Marcello.  When
Marcello showed up, he began to disparage the television and after a while he
either went to bed without eating or went out and wandered around with
Pasquale and Antonio until late at night. Lila said that she herself loved the
television. She especially liked to watch it with Melina, who came every night
and sat silently for a long time, completely absorbed. It was the only moment
of  peace.  Otherwise,  everyone’s  anger  was  unloaded  on  her:  her  brother’s
anger because she had abandoned him to his fate as the slave of their father
while  she  set  off  on  a  marriage  that  would  make  her  a  lady;  the  anger  of
Fernando and Nunzia because she was not nice to Solara but, rather, treated
him like dirt; finally the anger of Marcello, who, although she hadn’t accepted
him, felt increasingly that he was her fiancé, in fact her master, and tended to
pass from silent devotion to attempts to kiss her, to suspicious questions about
where  she  went  during  the  day,  whom  she  saw,  if  she  had  had  other
boyfriends, if she had even just touched anyone. Since she wouldn’t answer, or,
worse still, teased him by telling him of kisses and embraces with nonexistent
boyfriends, he one evening had whispered to her seriously, “You tease me, but
remember when you threatened me with the knife? Well, if I find out that you
like someone else, remember, I won’t merely threaten you, I’ll kill you.” So she
didn’t know how to get out of this situation and she still carried her weapon,
just in case. But she was terrified. She wrote, in the last pages, of feeling all the
evil of the neighborhood around her. Rather, she wrote obscurely, good and
evil  are  mixed  together  and  reinforce  each  other  in  turn.  Marcello,  if  you
thought about it, was really a good arrangement, but the good tasted of the bad
and the bad tasted of the good, it was a mixture that took your breath away. A
few  evenings  earlier,  something  had  happened  that  had  really  scared  her.
Marcello had left, the television was off, the house was empty, Rino was out,
her parents were going to bed. She was alone in the kitchen washing the dishes
and was tired, really without energy, when there was an explosion. She had
turned suddenly and realized that the big copper pot had exploded. Like that,
by itself. It was hanging on the nail where it normally hung, but in the middle
there was a large hole and the rim was lifted and twisted and the pot itself was
all deformed, as if it could no longer maintain its appearance as a pot. Her
mother had hurried in in her nightgown and had blamed her for dropping it
and ruining it. But a copper pot, even if you drop it, doesn’t break and doesn’t
become  misshapen  like  that.  “It’s  this  sort  of  thing,”  Lila  concluded,  “that
frightens me. More than Marcello, more than anyone. And I feel that I have to
find  a  solution,  otherwise,  everything,  one  thing  after  another,  will  break,
everything, everything.” She sent me many more good wishes, and, even if she
wished the opposite, even if she couldn’t wait to see me, even if she urgently
needed my help, she hoped I would stay in Ischia with kind Signora Nella and
never return to the neighborhood again.
35.
This letter disturbed me greatly. Lila’s world, as usual, rapidly superimposed
itself on mine. Everything that I had written in July and August seemed to me
trivial, I was seized by a frenzy to redeem myself. I didn’t go to the beach, I
tried  immediately  to  answer  her  with  a  serious  letter,  one  that  had  the
essential, pure yet colloquial tone of hers. But if the other letters had come
easily to me—I dashed off pages and pages in a few minutes, without ever
correcting—this I wrote, rewrote, rewrote again, and yet Nino’s hatred of his
father, the role that the affair of Melina had had in the origin of that ugly
sentiment, my entire relationship with the Sarratore family, even my anxiety
about what was happening to her, came out badly. Donato, who in reality was a
remarkable  man,  on  the  page  became  a  banal  family  man;  and,  as  far  as
Marcello was concerned, I was capable only of superficial advice. In the end all
that seemed true was my disappointment that she had a television at home and
I didn’t.
In other words I couldn’t answer her, even though I deprived myself of the
sea, the sun, the pleasure of being with Ciro, with Pino, with Clelia, with Lidia,
with Marisa, with Sarratore. Thankfully Nella, at some point, came to keep me
company on the terrace, bringing me an orzata. And when the Sarratores came
back  from  the  beach,  they  were  sorry  that  I  had  stayed  home  and  began
celebrating me again. Lidia herself wanted to make a cake filled with pastry
cream, Nella opened a bottle of vermouth, Donato Sarratore began singing
Neapolitan songs, Marisa gave me an oakum seahorse she had bought at the
Port the night before.
I grew calmer, yet I couldn’t get out of my mind Lila in trouble while I was so
well, so celebrated. I said, in a slightly dramatic way, that I had received a
letter from a friend, that my friend needed me, and so I was thinking of leaving
before  the  appointed  time.  “The  day  after  tomorrow  at  the  latest,”  I
announced, but without really believing it. In fact I said it only to hear Nella
say how sorry she was, Lidia how Ciro would suffer, Marisa how desperate she
would be, and Sarratore exclaim sadly, “How will we manage without you?” All
this moved me, making my birthday even happier.
Then Pino and Ciro began to nod and Lidia and Donato took them to bed.
Marisa helped me wash the dishes, Nella said that if I wanted to sleep a little
later in the morning she would get up to make breakfast. I protested, that was
my job. One by one, they withdrew, and I was alone. I made my bed in the usual
corner,  I  looked  around  to  see  if  there  were  cockroaches,  if  there  were
mosquitoes. My gaze fell on the copper pots.
How  evocative  Lila’s  writing  was;  I  looked  at  the  pots  with  increasing
distress. I remembered that she had always liked their brilliance, when she
washed  them  she  took  great  care  in  polishing  them.  On  them,  not
coincidentally, four years earlier, she had placed the blood that spurted from
the neck of Don Achille when he was stabbed. On them now she had deposited
that sensation of threat, the anguish over the difficult choice she had, making
one of them explode like a sign, as if its shape had decided abruptly to cede.
Would I know how to imagine those things without her? Would I know how to
give life to every object, let it bend in unison with mine? I turned off the light. I
got  undressed  and  got  in  bed  with  Lila’s  letter  and  Nino’s  blue  bookmark,
which seemed to me at that moment the most precious things that I possessed.
From the window the white light of the moon rained down. I kissed the
bookmark as I did every night, I tried to reread my friend’s letter in the weak
glow. The pots shone, the table creaked, the ceiling weighed oppressively, the
night air and the sea pressed on the walls. Again I felt humbled by Lila’s ability
to write, by what she was able to give form to and I was not, my eyes misted. I
was happy, yes, that she was so good even without school, without books from
the library, but that happiness made me guiltily unhappy.
Then I heard footsteps. I saw the shadow of Sarratore enter the kitchen,
barefoot, in blue pajamas. I pulled up the sheet. He went to the tap, he took a
glass of water, drank. He remained standing for a few seconds in front of the
sink, put down the glass, moved toward my bed. He squatted beside me, his
elbows resting on the edge of the sheet.
“I know you’re awake,” he said.
“Yes.”
“Don’t think of your friend, stay.”
“She’s in trouble, she needs me.”
“It’s I who need you,” he said, and he leaned over, kissed me on the mouth
without the lightness of his son, half opening my lips with his tongue.
I was immobilized.
He pushed the sheet aside, continuing to kiss me with care, with passion,
and he sought my breast with his hand, he caressed me under the nightgown.
Then he let go, descended between my legs, pressed two fingers hard over my
underpants. I said, did nothing, I was terrified by that behavior, by the horror
it created, by the pleasure that I nevertheless felt. His mustache pricked my
upper lip, his tongue was rough. Slowly he left my mouth, took away his hand.
“Tomorrow night we’ll take a nice walk, you and I, on the beach,” he said, a
little hoarsely. “I love you and I know that you love me very much. Isn’t it
true?”
I said nothing. He brushed my lips again with his, murmured good night, got
up and left the kitchen. I didn’t move, I don’t know for how long. However I
tried to distance the sensation of his tongue, his caresses, the pressure of his
hand,  I  couldn’t.  Nino  had  wanted  to  warn  me,  did  he  know  what  would
happen? I felt an uncontainable hatred for Donato Sarratore and disgust for
myself, for the pleasure that lingered in my body. However unlikely it may
seem today, as long as I could remember until that night I had never given
myself pleasure, I didn’t know about it, to feel it surprised me. I remained in
the same position for many hours. Then, at first light, I shook myself, collected
all my things, took apart the bed, wrote two lines of thanks to Nella, and left.
The island was almost noiseless, the sea still, only the smells were intense.
Using the money that my mother had left me more than a month before, I took
the first departing ferry. As soon as the boat moved and the island, with its
tender early-morning colors, was distant enough, I thought that I finally had a
story to tell that Lila could not match. But I knew immediately that the disgust
I felt for Sarratore and the revulsion that I had toward myself would keep me
from saying anything. In fact this is the first time I’ve sought words for that
unexpected end to my vacation.
36.
I  found  Naples  submerged  in  a  stinking,  devastating  heat.  My  mother,
without saying a word about how I had changed—the acne gone, my skin sun-
darkened—reproached me because I had returned before the appointed time.
“What have you done,” she said, “you’ve behaved rudely, did the teacher’s
friend throw you out?”
It was different with my father, whose eyes shone and who showered me
with compliments, the most conspicuous of which, repeated a hundred times,
was: “Christ, what a pretty daughter I have.” As for my siblings, they said with
a certain contempt, “You look like a negro.”
I looked at myself in the mirror and I also marveled: the sun had made me a
shining blonde, but my face, my arms, my legs were as if painted with dark
gold. As long as I had been immersed in the colors of Ischia, amid sunburned
faces, my transformation had seemed suitable; now, restored to the context of
the neighborhood, where every face, every street had a sick pallor, it seemed
to me excessive, anomalous. The people, the buildings, the dusty, busy stradone
had  the  appearance  of  a  poorly  printed  photograph,  like  the  ones  in  the
newspapers.
As soon as I could I hurried to find Lila. I called her from the courtyard, she
looked out, emerged from the doorway. She hugged me, kissed me, gave me
compliments, so that I was overwhelmed by all that explicit affection. She was
the same and yet, in little more than a month, she had changed further. She
seemed no longer a girl but a woman, a woman of at least eighteen, an age that
then seemed to me advanced. Her old clothes were short and tight, as if she
had grown inside them in the space of a few minutes, and they hugged her
body more than they should. She was even taller, more developed, her back
was straight. And the pale face above her slender neck seemed to me to have a
delicate, unusual beauty.
She seemed nervous, she kept looking around on the street, behind her, but
she didn’t explain. She said only, “Come with me,” and wanted me to go with
her to Stefano’s grocery. She added, taking my arm, “It’s something I can only
do with you, thank goodness you’ve come back. I thought I’d have to wait till
September.”
We had never walked those streets toward the public gardens so close to one
another, so together, so happy to see each other. She told me that things were
getting  worse  every  day.  Just  the  night  before  Marcello  had  arrived  with
sweets and spumante and had given her a ring studded with diamonds. She had
accepted it, had put it on her finger to avoid trouble in the presence of her
parents, but just before he left, at the door, she had given it back to him rudely.
Marcello had protested, he had threatened her, as he now did more and more
often,  then  had  burst  into  tears.  Fernando  and  Nunzia  had  immediately
realized  that  something  was  wrong.  Her  mother  had  grown  very  fond  of
Marcello, she liked the good things he brought to the house every night, she
was proud of being the owner of a television; and Fernando felt as if he had
stopped suffering, because, thanks to a close relationship with the Solaras, he
could look to the future without anxieties. Thus, as soon as Marcello left, both
had harassed her more than usual to find out what was happening. Result: for
the first time in a long, long time, Rino had defended her, had insisted that if
his sister didn’t want a halfwit like Marcello, it was her sacrosanct right to
refuse him and that, if they insisted on giving him to her, he, in person, would
burn down everything, the house and the shoemaker’s shop and himself and
the entire family. Father and son had started fighting, Nunzia had got involved,
all the neighbors had woken up. Not only: Rino had thrown himself on the bed
in  distress,  had  abruptly  fallen  asleep,  and  an  hour  later  had  had  another
episode of sleepwalking. They had found him in the kitchen lighting matches,
and passing them in front of the gas valve as if to check for leaks. Nunzia,
terrified, had wakened Lila, saying, “Rino really does want to burn us all alive,”
and Lila had hurried in and reassured her mother: Rino was sleeping, and in
sleep, unlike when he was awake, he wanted to make sure that there was no
gas escaping. She had taken him back to bed.
“I can’t bear it anymore,” she concluded, “you don’t know what torture this
is, I have to get out of this situation.”
She clung to me as if I could give her the energy.
“You’re well,” she said, “everything’s going well for you: you have to help
me.”
I  answered  that  she  could  count  on  me  for  everything  and  she  seemed
relieved, she squeezed my arm, whispered, “Look.”
I saw in the distance a sort of red spot that radiated light.
“What is it?”
“Don’t you see?”
I couldn’t see clearly.
“It’s Stefano’s new car.”
We walked to where the car was parked, in front of the grocery store, which
had been enlarged, had two entrances now, and was extremely crowded. The
customers, waiting to be served, threw admiring glances at that symbol of
well-being  and  prestige:  a  car  like  that  had  never  been  seen  in  the
neighborhood, all glass and metal, with a roof that opened. A car for wealthy
people, nothing like the Solaras’ 1100.
I wandered around it while Lila stood in the shadows and surveyed the street
as if she expected violence to erupt at any moment. Stefano looked out from
the doorway of the grocery, in his greasy apron, his large head and his high
forehead giving a not unpleasant sense of disproportion. He crossed the street,
greeted me cordially, said, “How well you look, like an actress.”
He, too, looked well: he had been in the sun as I had, maybe we were the
only ones in the whole neighborhood who appeared so healthy. I said to him:
“You’re very dark.”
“I took a week’s vacation.”
“Where?”
“In Ischia.”
“I was in Ischia, too.”
“I know, Lina told me: I looked for you but didn’t see you.”
I pointed to the car. “It’s beautiful.”
Stefano’s  face  wore  an  expression  of  moderate  agreement.  He  said,
indicating Lila, with laughing eyes: “I bought it for your friend, but she won’t
believe it.” I looked at Lila, who was standing in the shadows, her expression
serious, tense. Stefano said to her, vaguely ironic, “Now Lenuccia’s back, what
are you doing?”
Lila said, as if the thing annoyed her, “Let’s go. But remember, you invited
her, not me: I only came along with the two of you.”
He smiled and went back into the shop.
“What’s happening?” I asked her, confused.
“I don’t know,” she said, and meant that she didn’t know exactly what she
was getting into. She looked the way she did when she had to do a difficult
calculation in her head, but without her usual impudent expression; she was
visibly  preoccupied,  as  if  she  were  attempting  an  experiment  with  an
uncertain result. “It all began,” she said, “with the arrival of that car.” Stefano,
first as if joking, then with increasing seriousness, had sworn to her that he
had bought the car for her, for the pleasure of opening the door and having her
get in at least once. “It was made just for you,” he had said. And since it had
been delivered, at the end of July, he had been asking her constantly, not in an
aggressive way, but politely, first to take a drive with him and Alfonso, then
with him and Pinuccia, then even with him and his mother. But she had always
said no. Finally she had promised him, “I’ll go when Lenuccia comes back from
Ischia.” And now we were there, and what was to happen would happen.
“But he knows about Marcello?”
“Of course he knows.”
“And so?”
“So he insists.”
“I’m scared, Lila.”
“Do you remember how many things we’ve done that scared you? I waited
for you on purpose.”
Stefano returned without his apron, dark eyes, dark face, shining black eyes,
white shirt and dark pants. He opened the car door, sat behind the wheel, put
the top down. I was about to get into the narrow back space but Lila stopped
me, she settled herself in the back. I sat uneasily next to Stefano, he started off
immediately, heading toward the new buildings.
The heat dissipated in the wind. I felt good, intoxicated by the speed and by
the tranquil certainties released by Carracci’s body. It seemed to me that Lila
had explained everything without explaining anything. There was, yes, this
brand-new sports car that had been bought solely to take her for a ride that
had just begun. There was, yes, that young man who, though he knew about
Marcello Solara, was violating men’s rules of masculinity without any visible
anxiety. There was me, yes, dragged furiously into that business to hide by my
presence secret words between them, maybe even a friendship. But what type
of friendship? Certainly, with that drive, something significant was happening,
and yet Lila had been unable or unwilling to provide me with the elements
necessary for understanding. What did she have in mind? She had to know that
she was setting in motion an earthquake worse than when she threw the ink-
soaked bits of paper. And yet it might be that she wasn’t aiming at anything
precise. She was like that, she threw things off balance just to see if she could
put them back in some other way. So here we were racing along, hair blowing
in the wind, Stefano driving with satisfied skill, I sitting beside him as if I were
his girlfriend. I thought of how he had looked at me, when he said I looked like
an actress. I thought of the possibility of him liking me more than he now liked
my friend. I thought with horror of the idea that Marcello Solara might shoot
him. His beautiful person with its confident gestures would lose substance like
the copper of the pot that Lila had written about.
We were driving among the new buildings in order to avoid passing the Bar
Solara.
“I don’t care if Marcello sees us,” Stefano said without emphasis, “but if it
matters to you it’s fine like this.”’
We went through the tunnel, we turned toward the Marina. It was the road
that Lila and I had taken many years earlier, when we had gotten caught in the
rain. I mentioned that episode, she smiled, Stefano wanted us to tell him about
it. We told him everything, it was fun, and meanwhile we arrived at the Granili.
“What do you think, fast, isn’t it?”
“Incredibly fast,” I said, enthusiastically.
Lila  made  no  comment.  She  looked  around,  at  times  she  touched  my
shoulder to point out the houses, the ragged poverty along the street, as if she
saw a confirmation of something and I was supposed to understand it right
away. Then she asked Stefano, seriously, without preamble, “Are you really
different?”
He looked at her in the rearview mirror. “From whom?”
“You know.”
He didn’t answer immediately. Then he said in dialect, “Do you want me to
tell you the truth?”
“Yes.”
“The intention is there, but I don’t know how it will end up.”
At that point I was sure that Lila must not have told me quite a few things.
That allusive tone was evidence that they were close, that they had talked
other times and not in jest but seriously. What had I missed in the period of
Ischia? I turned to look at her, she delayed replying, I thought that Stefano’s
answer had made her nervous because of its vagueness. I saw her flooded by
sunlight, eyes half closed, her shirt swelled by her breast and by the wind.
“The poverty here is worse than among us,” she said. And then, without
connection, laughing, “Don’t think I’ve forgotten about when you wanted to
prick my tongue.”
Stefano nodded.
“That was another era,” he said.
“Once a coward, always a coward—you were twice as big as me.”
He gave a small, embarrassed smile and, without answering, accelerated in
the direction of the port. The drive lasted less than half an hour, we went back
on the Rettifilo and Piazza Garibaldi.
“Your  brother  isn’t  well,”  Stefano  said  when  we  had  returned  to  the
outskirts of the neighborhood. He looked at her again in the mirror and asked,
“Are those shoes displayed in the window the ones you made?”
“What do you know about the shoes?”
“It’s all Rino talks about.”
“And so?”
“They’re very beautiful.”
She narrowed her eyes, squeezed them almost until they were closed.
“Buy them,” she said in her provocative tone.
“How much will you sell them for?”
“Talk to my father.”
Stefano made a decisive U turn that threw me against the door, we turned
onto the street where the shoe repair shop was.
“What are you doing?” Lila asked, alarmed now.
“You said to buy them and I’m going to buy them.”
37.
He  stopped  the  car  in  front  of  the  shoemaker’s  shop,  came  around  and
opened the door for me, gave me his hand to help me out. He didn’t concern
himself with Lila, who got out herself and stayed behind. He and I stopped in
front of the window, under the eyes of Fernando and Rino, who looked at us
from inside the shop with sullen curiosity.
When Lila joined us Stefano opened the door of the shop, let me go first,
went in without making way for her. He was very courteous with father and
son, and asked if he could see the shoes. Rino rushed to get them, and Stefano
examined them, praised them: “They’re light and yet strong, they really have a
nice line.” He asked me, “What do you think, Lenù?”
I said, with great embarrassment, “They’re very handsome.”
He turned to Fernando: “Your daughter said that all three of you worked on
them and that you have a plan to make others, for women as well.”
“Yes,” said Rino, looking in wonder at his sister.
“Yes,” said Fernando, puzzled, “but not right away.”
Rino said to his sister, a little worked up, because he was afraid she would
refuse, “Show him the designs.”
Lila, continuing to surprise him, didn’t resist. She went to the back of the
shop and returned, handing the sheets of paper to her brother, who gave them
to Stefano.  They  were  the models  that  she  had designed  almost  two  years
earlier.
Stefano showed me a drawing of a pair of women’s shoes with a very high
heel.
“Would you buy them?”
“Yes.”
He went back to examining the designs. Then he sat down on a stool, took
off his right shoe.
“What size is it?”
“43, but it could be a 44,” Rino lied.
Lila, surprising us again, knelt in front of Stefano and using the shoehorn
helped him slip his foot into the new shoe. Then she took off the other shoe
and did the same.
Stefano, who until that moment had been playing the part of the practical,
businesslike man, was obviously disturbed. He waited for Lila to get up, and
remained seated for some seconds as if to catch his breath. Then he stood, took
a few steps.
“They’re tight,” he said.
Rino turned gray, disappointed.
“We can put them on the machine and widen them,” Fernando interrupted,
but uncertainly.
Stefano turned to me and asked, “How do they look?”
“Nice,” I said.
“Then I’ll take them.”
Fernando remained impassive, Rino brightened.
“You know, Ste’, these are an exclusive Cerullo design, they’ll be expensive.”
Stefano smiled, took an affectionate tone: “And if they weren’t an exclusive
Cerullo design, do you think I would buy them? When will they be ready?”
Rino looked at his father, radiant.
“We’ll keep them in the machine for at least three days,” Fernando said, but
it was clear that he could have said ten days, twenty, a month, he was so eager
to take his time in the face of this unexpected novelty.
“Good: you think of a friendly price and I’ll come in three days to pick them
up.”
He folded the pieces of paper with the designs and put them in his pocket
before our puzzled eyes. Then he shook hands with Fernando, with Rino, and
headed toward the door.
“The drawings,” Lila said coldly.
“Can I bring them back in three days?” Stefano asked in a cordial tone, and
without waiting for an answer opened the door. He made way for me to pass
and went out after me.
I was already settled in the car next to him when Lila joined us. She was
angry.
“You think my father is a fool, that my brother is a fool?”
“What do you mean?”
“If you think you’ll make fools of my family and me, you are mistaken.”
“You are insulting me: I’m not Marcello Solara.”
“And who are you?”
“A businessman: the shoes you’ve designed are unusual. And I don’t mean
just the ones I bought, I mean all of them.”
“So?”
“So let me think and we’ll see each other in three days.”
Lila stared at him as if she wanted to read his mind, she didn’t move away
from  the  car.  Finally  she  said  something  that  I  would  never  have  had  the
courage to utter: “Look, Marcello tried in every possible way to buy me but no
one is going to buy me.”
Stefano looked her straight in the eyes for a long moment.
“I don’t spend a lira if I don’t think it can produce a hundred.”
He started the engine and we left. Now I was sure: the drive had been a sort
of agreement reached at the end of many encounters, much talk. I said weakly,
in Italian, “Please, Stefano, leave me at the corner? If my mother sees me in a
car with you she’ll bash my face in.”
38.
Lila’s life changed decisively during that month of September. It wasn’t easy,
but  it  changed.  As  for  me,  I  had  returned  from  Ischia  in  love  with  Nino,
branded by the lips and hands of his father, sure that I would weep night and
day because of the mixture of happiness and horror I felt inside. Instead I made
no attempt to find a form for my emotions, in a few hours everything was
reduced. I put aside Nino’s voice, the irritation of his father’s mustache. The
island faded, lost itself in some secret corner of my head. I made room for what
was happening to Lila.
In the three days that followed the astonishing ride in the convertible, she,
with the excuse of doing the shopping, went often to Stefano’s grocery, but
always asked me to go with her. I did it with my heart pounding, frightened by
the  possible  appearance  of  Marcello,  but  also  pleased  with  my  role  as
confidante generous with advice, as accomplice in weaving plots, as apparent
object of Stefano’s attentions. We were girls, even if we imagined ourselves
wickedly daring. We embroidered on the facts—Marcello, Stefano, the shoes—
with our usual eagerness and it seemed to us that we always knew how to make
things come out right. “I’ll say this to him,” she hypothesized, and I would
suggest a small variation: “No, say this.” Then she and Stefano would be deep
in conversation in a corner behind the counter, while Alfonso exchanged a few
words with me, Pinuccia, annoyed, waited on the customers, and Maria, at the
cash register, observed her older son apprehensively, because he had been
neglecting the job lately, and was feeding the gossip of the neighbors.
Naturally we were improvising. In the course of that back and forth I tried to
understand what was really going through Lila’s head, so as to be in tune with
her goals. At first I had the impression that she intended simply to enable her
father and brother to earn some money by selling Stefano, for a good price, the
only pair of shoes produced by the Cerullos, but soon it seemed to me that her
principal aim was to get rid of Marcello by making use of the young grocer. In
this sense, she was decisive when I asked her: “Which of the two do you like
more?”
She shrugged.
“I’ve never liked Marcello, he makes me sick.”
“You would become engaged to Stefano just to get Marcello out of your
house?”
She thought for a moment and said yes.
From then on the ultimate goal of all our plotting seemed to us that—to fight
by  every  means  possible  Marcello’s  intrusion  in  her  life.  The  rest  came
crowding around almost by chance and we merely gave it a rhythm and, at
times, a true orchestration. Or so at least we believed. In fact, the person who
was acting was only and was always Stefano.
Punctually, three days later, he went to the store and bought the shoes, even
though  they  were  tight.  The  two  Cerullos  with  much  hesitation  asked  for
twenty-five thousand lire, but were ready to go down to ten thousand. He
didn’t bat an eye and put down another twenty thousand in exchange for Lila’s
drawings, which—he said—he liked, he wanted to frame them.
“Frame?” Rino asked.
“Yes.”
“Like a picture by a painter?”
“Yes.”
“And you told my sister that you’re buying her drawings?”
“Yes.”
Stefano didn’t stop there. In the following days he again poked his head in at
the  shop  and  announced  to  father  and  son  that  he  had  rented  the  space
adjacent to theirs. “For now it’s there,” he said, “but if you one day decide to
expand, remember that I am at your disposal.”
At the Cerullos’ they discussed for a long time what that statement meant.
“Expand?” Finally Lila, since they couldn’t get there on their own, said: “He’s
proposing to transform the shoe shop into a workshop for making Cerullo
shoes.”
“And the money?” Rino asked cautiously.
“He’ll invest it.”
“He told you?” Fernando, incredulous, was alarmed, immediately followed
by Nunzia.
“He told the two of you,” Lila said, indicating her father and brother.
“But he knows that handmade shoes are expensive?”
“You showed him.”
“And if they don’t sell?”
“You’ve wasted the work and he’s wasted the money.”
“And that’s it?”
“That’s it.”
The entire family was upset for days. Marcello moved to the background. He
arrived  at  night  at  eight-thirty  and  dinner  wasn’t  ready.  Often  he  found
himself alone in front of the television with Melina and Ada, while the Cerullos
talked in another room.
Naturally the most enthusiastic was Rino, who regained energy, color, good
humor, and, as he had been the close friend of the Solaras, so he began to be
Stefano’s  close  friend,  Alfonso’s,  Pinuccia’s,  even  Signora  Maria’s.  When,
finally, Fernando’s last reservation dissolved, Stefano went to the shop and,
after a small discussion, came to a verbal agreement on the basis of which he
would put up the expenses and the two Cerullos would start production of the
model that Lila and Rino had already made and all the other models, it being
understood that they would split the possible profits half and half. He took the
documents out of a pocket and showed them to them one after another.
“You’ll do this, this, this,” he said, “but let’s hope that it won’t take two
years, as I know happened with the other.”
“My daughter is a girl,” Fernando explained, embarrassed, “and Rino hasn’t
yet learned the job well.”
Stefano shook his head in a friendly way.
“Leave Lina out of it. You’ll have to take on some workers.”
“And who will pay them?” Fernando asked.
“Me again. You choose two or three, freely, according to your judgment.”
Fernando,  at  the  idea  of  having,  no  less,  employees,  turned  red  and  his
tongue was loosened, to the evident annoyance of his son. He spoke of how he
had learned the trade from his late father. He told of how hard the work was
on  the  machines,  in  Casoria.  He  said  that  his  mistake  had  been  to  marry
Nunzia, who had weak hands and no wish to work, but if he had married Ines, a
flame of his youth who had been a great worker, he would in time have had a
business all his own, better than Campanile, with a line to display perhaps at
the regional trade show. He told us, finally, that he had in his head beautiful
shoes, perfect, that if Stefano weren’t set on those silly things of Lina’s, they
could start production now and you know how many they would sell. Stefano
listened patiently, but repeated that he, for now, was interested only in having
Lila’s exact designs made. Rino then took his sister’s sheets of paper, examined
them carefully, and asked him in a lightly teasing tone: “When you get them
framed where will you hang them?”
“In here.”
Rino looked at his father, but he had turned sullen again and said nothing.
“My sister agrees about everything?” he asked.
Stefano smiled: “Who can do anything if your sister doesn’t agree?”
He got up, shook Fernando’s hand vigorously, and headed toward the door.
Rino  went  with  him  and,  with  sudden  concern,  called  to  him  from  the
doorway, as Stefano was going to the red convertible: “The brand of the shoes
is Cerullo.”
Stefano  waved  to  him,  without  turning:  “A  Cerullo  invented  them  and
Cerullo they will be called.”
39.
That same night Rino, before he went out with Pasquale and Antonio, said,
“Marcè, have you seen that car Stefano’s got?”
Marcello, stupefied by the television and by sadness, didn’t even answer.
Then Rino drew his comb out of his pocket, pulled it through his hair, and
said cheerfully: “You know that he bought our shoes for twenty-five thousand
lire?”
“You see he’s got money to throw away,” Marcello answered, and Melina
burst out laughing, it wasn’t clear if she was reacting to that remark or to what
was showing on the television.
From that moment Rino found a way, night after night, to annoy Marcello,
and the atmosphere became increasingly tense. Besides, as soon as Solara, who
was always greeted kindly by Nunzia, arrived, Lila disappeared, saying she was
tired, and went to bed. One night Marcello, very depressed, talked to Nunzia.
“If your daughter goes to bed as soon as I arrive, what am I coming here
for?”
Evidently  he  hoped  that  she  would  comfort  him,  saying  something  that
would encourage him to persevere. But Nunzia didn’t know what to say and so
he stammered, “Does she like someone else?”
“But no.”
“I know she goes to do the shopping at Stefano’s.”
“And where should she go, my boy, to do the shopping?”
Marcello was silent, eyes lowered.
“She was seen in the car with the grocer.”
“Lenuccia was there, too: Stefano is interested in the porter’s daughter.”
“Lenuccia doesn’t seem to me a good companion for your daughter. Tell her
not to see her anymore.”
I was not a good companion? Lila was not supposed to see me anymore?
When my friend reported that request of Marcello’s I went over conclusively to
Stefano’s side and began to praise his tactful ways, his calm determination.
“He’s rich,” I said to her finally. But even as I said that I realized how the idea
of the riches girls dreamed of was changing further. The treasure chests full of
gold pieces that a procession of servants in livery would deposit in our castle
when we published a book like Little Women—riches and fame—had truly faded.
Perhaps the idea of money as a cement to solidify our existence and prevent it
from dissolving, together with the people who were dear to us, endured. But
the  fundamental  feature  that  now  prevailed  was  concreteness,  the  daily
gesture,  the  negotiation.  This  wealth  of  adolescence  proceeded  from  a
fantastic, still childish illumination—the designs for extraordinary shoes—but
it was embodied in the petulant dissatisfaction of Rino, who wanted to spend
like a big shot, in the television, in the meals, and in the ring with which
Marcello  wanted  to  buy  a  feeling,  and,  finally,  from  step  to  step,  in  that
courteous  youth  Stefano,  who  sold  groceries,  had  a  red  convertible,  spent
forty-five thousand lire like nothing, framed drawings, wished to do business
in shoes as well as in cheese, invested in leather and a workforce, and seemed
convinced that he could inaugurate a new era of peace and well-being for the
neighborhood: it was, in short, wealth that existed in the facts of every day,
and so was without splendor and without glory.
“He’s rich,” I heard Lila repeat, and we started laughing. But then she added,
“Also nice, also good,” and I agreed, these last were qualities that Marcello
didn’t  have,  a  further  reason  for  being  on  Stefano’s  side.  Yet  those  two
adjectives confused me, I felt that they gave the final blow to the shine of
childish  fantasies.  No  castle,  no  treasure  chest—I  seemed  to  understand—
would concern Lila and me alone, intent on writing our Little Women. Wealth,
incarnated in Stefano, was taking the form of a young man in a greasy apron,
was gaining features, smell, voice, was expressing kindness and goodness, was
a male we had known forever, the oldest son of Don Achille.
I was disturbed.
“But he wanted to prick your tongue,” I said.
“He was a child,” she answered, with emotion, sweet as I had never heard
her before, so that only at that moment did I realize that she was much farther
along than what she had said to me in words.
In the following days everything became clearer. I saw how she talked to
Stefano and how he seemed shaped by her voice. I adapted to the pact they
were making, I didn’t want to be cut out. And we plotted for hours—the two of
us, the three of us—to act in a way that would quickly silence people, feelings,
the arrangement of things. A worker arrived in the space next to the shoe shop
and  took  down  the  dividing  wall.  The  shoemaker’s  shop  was  reorganized.
Three nearly silent apprentices appeared, country boys, from Melito. In one
corner  they  continued  to  do  resoling,  in  the  rest  of  the  space  Fernando
arranged  benches,  shelves,  his  tools,  his  wooden  forms  according  to  the
various sizes, and began, with sudden energy, unsuspected in a man so thin,
consumed by a bitter discontent, to talk about a course of action.
Just that day, when the new work was about to begin, Stefano showed up. He
carried a package done up in brown paper. They all jumped to their feet, even
Fernando, as if he had come for an inspection. He opened the package, and
inside were a number of small pictures, all the same size, in narrow brown
frames. They were Lila’s notebook pages, under glass, like precious relics. He
asked  permission  from  Fernando  to  hang  them  on  the  walls,  Fernando
grumbled something, and Stefano had Rino and the apprentices help him put
in the nails. When the pictures were hung, Stefano asked the three helpers to
go get a coffee and handed them some lire. As soon as he was alone with the
shoemaker and his son, he announced quietly that he wanted to marry Lila.
An unbearable silence fell. Rino confined himself to a knowing little smile
and  Fernando  said  finally,  weakly,  “Stefano,  Lina  is  engaged  to  Marcello
Solara.”
“Your daughter doesn’t know it.”
“What do you mean?”
Rino interrupted, cheerfully: “He’s telling the truth: you and Mamma let that
shit come to our house, but Lina never wanted him and doesn’t want him.”
Fernando gave his son a stern look. The grocer said gently, looking around:
“We’ve started out on a job now, let’s not get worked up. I ask of you a single
thing, Don Fernà: let your daughter decide. If she wants Marcello Solara, I will
resign myself. I love her so much that if she’s happy with someone else I will
withdraw and between us everything will remain as it is now. But if she wants
me—if she wants me—there’s no help for it, you must give her to me.”
“You’re  threatening  me,”  Fernando  said,  but  halfheartedly,  in  a  tone  of
resigned observation.
“No, I’m asking you to do what’s best for your daughter.”
“I know what’s best for her.”
“Yes, but she knows better than you.”
And here Stefano got up, opened the door, called me, I was waiting outside
with Lila.
“Lenù.”
We went in. How we liked feeling that we were at the center of those events,
the two of us together, directing them toward their outcome. I remember the
extreme tension of that moment. Stefano said to Lila, “I’m saying to you in
front of your father: I love you, more than my life. Will you marry me?”
Lila answered seriously, “Yes.”
Fernando gasped slightly, then murmured, with the same subservience that
in times gone by he had manifested toward Don Achille: “We’re offending not
only Marcello but all the Solaras. Who’s going to tell that poor boy?”
Lila said, “I will.”
40.
In fact two nights later, in front of the whole family except Rino, who was
out, before they sat down at the table, before the television was turned on, Lila
asked Marcello, “Will you take me to get some ice cream?”
Marcello couldn’t believe his ears.
“Ice  cream?  Without  eating  first?  You  and  me?”  And  he  suddenly  asked
Nunzia, “Signora, would you come, too?”
Nunzia turned on the television and said, “No, thank you, Marcè. But don’t
be too long. Ten minutes, you’ll go and be back.”
“Yes,” he promised, happily, “thank you.”
He repeated thank you at least four times. It seemed to him that the longed-
for moment had arrived, Lila was about to say yes.
But as soon as they were outside the building she confronted him and said,
with the cold cruelty that had come easily to her since her first years of life, “I
never told you that I loved you.”
“I know. But now you do?”
“No.”
Marcello, who was heavily built, a healthy, ruddy youth of twenty-three,
leaned against a lamppost, brokenhearted.
“Really no?”
“No. I love someone else.”
“Who is it?”
“Stefano.”
“I knew it, but I couldn’t believe it.”
“You have to believe it, it’s true.”
“I’ll kill you both.”
“With me you can try right now.”
Marcello left the lamppost in a rush, but, with a kind of death rattle, he bit
his clenched right fist until it bled.
“I love you too much, I can’t do it.”
“Then get your brother, your father to do it, some friend, maybe they’re
capable. But make it clear to all of them that you had better kill me first.
Because if you touch anyone else while I’m alive, I will kill you, and you know I
will, starting with you.”
Marcello continued to bite his finger stubbornly. Then he repressed a sort of
sob that shook his breast, turned, and went off.
She shouted after him: “Send someone to get the television, we don’t need
it.”
41.
Everything happened in little more than a month and Lila in the end seemed
to me happy. She had found an outlet for the shoe project, she had given an
opportunity  to  her  brother  and  the  whole  family,  she  had  gotten  rid  of
Marcello Solara and had become the fiancée of the most respectable wealthy
young man in the neighborhood. What more could she want? Nothing. She had
everything.  When  school  began  again  I  felt  the  dreariness  of  it  more  than
usual. I was reabsorbed by the work and, so that the teachers would not find
me unprepared, I went back to studying until eleven and setting my alarm for
five-thirty. I saw Lila less and less.
On  the  other  hand,  my  relationship  with  Stefano’s  brother,  Alfonso,
solidified. Although he had worked in the grocery all summer, he had passed
the  makeup  exams  successfully,  with  seven  in  each  of  the  subjects:  Latin,
Greek, and English. Gino, who had hoped that he would fail so that they could
repeat  the  first  year  of  high  school  together,  was  disappointed.  When  he
realized that the two of us, now in our second year, went to school and came
home together every day, he grew even more bitter and became mean. He no
longer spoke to me, his former girlfriend, or to Alfonso, his former deskmate,
even though he was in the classroom next to ours and we often met in the
hallways, as well as in the streets of the neighborhood. But he did worse: soon I
heard that he was telling nasty stories about us. He said that I was in love with
Alfonso and touched him during class even though Alfonso didn’t respond,
because, as he knew very well, he who had sat next to him for a year, he didn’t
like girls, he preferred boys. I reported this to Alfonso, expecting him to beat
up  Gino,  as  was  the  rule  in  such  cases,  but  he  confined  himself  to  saying,
contemptuously, in dialect, “Everyone knows that he’s the fag.”
Alfonso  was  a  pleasant,  fortunate  discovery.  He  gave  an  impression  of
cleanliness  and  good  manners.  Although  his  features  were  very  similar  to
Stefano’s, the same eyes, same nose, same mouth; although his body, as he
grew, was taking the same form, the large head, legs slightly short in relation
to the torso; although in his gaze and in his gestures he manifested the same
mildness, I felt in him a total absence of the determination that was concealed
in every cell of Stefano’s body, and that in the end, I thought, reduced his
courtesy  to  a  sort  of  hiding  place  from  which  to  jump  out  unexpectedly.
Alfonso was soothing, that type of human being, rare in the neighborhood,
from whom you know you needn’t expect any cruelty. We didn’t talk a lot, but
we didn’t feel uncomfortable. He always had what I needed and if he didn’t he
hurried  to  get  it.  He  loved  me  without  any  tension  and  I  felt  quietly
affectionate toward him. The first day of school we ended up sitting at the
same desk, a thing that was audacious at the time, and even if the other boys
made  fun  of  him  because  he  was  always  near  me  and  the  girls  asked  me
continuously if he was my boyfriend, neither of us decided to change places.
He was a trusted person. If he saw that I needed my own time, he either waited
for me at a distance or said goodbye and went off. If he realized that I wanted
him to stay with me, he stayed even if he had other things to do.
I used him to escape Nino Sarratore. When, for the first time after Ischia, we
saw each other from a distance, Nino came toward me in a friendly way, but I
dismissed him with a few cold remarks. And yet I liked him so much, if his tall
slender figure merely appeared I blushed and my heart beat madly. And yet
now that Lila was really engaged, officially engaged—and to such a fiancé, a
man of twenty-two, not a boy: kind, decisive, courageous—it was more urgent
than ever that I, too, should have an enviable fiancé and so rebalance our
relationship. It would be lovely to go out as four, Lila with her betrothed, I with
mine. Of course, Nino didn’t have a red convertible. Of course, he was a student
in the fourth year of high school, and thus didn’t have a lira. But he was a lot
taller than I, while Stefano was an inch or so shorter than Lila. And he spoke a
literary Italian, when he wanted to. And he read and discussed everything and
was aware of the great questions of the human condition, while Stefano lived
shut off in his grocery, spoke almost exclusively in dialect, had not gone past
the  vocational  school,  at  the  cash  register  had  his  mamma,  who  did  the
accounts better than he, and, though he had a good character, was sensitive
above all to the profitable turnover of money. Yet, although passion consumed
me, although I saw clearly the prestige I would acquire in Lila’s eyes if I were
bound to him, for the second time since seeing him and falling in love I felt
incapable  of  establishing  a  relationship.  The  motive  seemed  to  me  much
stronger  than  that  of  childhood.  Seeing  him  brought  immediately  to  mind
Donato  Sarratore,  even  if  they  didn’t  resemble  each  other  at  all.  And  the
disgust, the rage aroused by the memory of what his father had done without
my being able to repulse him extended to Nino. Of course, I loved him. I longed
to talk to him, walk with him, and at times I thought, racking my brains: Why
do  you  behave  like  that,  the  father  isn’t  the  son,  the  son  isn’t  the  father,
behave as Stefano did with the Pelusos. But I couldn’t. As soon as I imagined
kissing him, I felt the mouth of Donato, and a wave of pleasure and revulsion
mixed father and son into a single person.
An alarming episode occurred, which made the situation more complicated.
Alfonso  and  I  had  got  into  the  habit  of  walking  home.  We  went  to  Piazza
Nazionale and then reached Corso Meridionale. It was a long walk, but we
talked about homework, teachers, classmates, and it was pleasant. Then one
day, just beyond the ponds, at the start of the stradone, I turned and seemed to
see on the railway embankment, in his conductor’s uniform, Donato Sarratore.
I started with rage and horror, and immediately turned away. When I looked
again, he was gone.
Whether that apparition was true or false, the sound my heart made in my
chest, like a gunshot, stayed with me, and, I don’t know why, I thought of the
passage in Lila’s letter about the sound that the copper pot had made when it
burst. That same sound returned the next day, at the mere sight of Nino. Then,
frightened, I took cover in affection for Alfonso, and at both the start and the
end of school I kept near him. As soon as the lanky figure of the boy I loved
appeared, I turned to the younger son of Don Achille as if I had the most urgent
things to tell him, and we walked away chattering.
It was, in other words, a confusing time, I would have liked to be attached to
Nino and yet I was careful to stay glued to Alfonso. In fact, out of fear that he
would get bored and leave me for other company, I behaved more and more
kindly toward him, sometimes I even spoke sweetly. But as soon as I realized
that  I  risked  encouraging  his  liking  me  I  changed  my  tone.  What  if  he
misunderstands  and  says  he  loves  me?  I  worried.  It  would  have  been
embarrassing, I would have had to reject him: Lila, my contemporary, was
engaged to a man, Stefano, and it would be humiliating to be with a boy, the
little  brother  of  her  fiancé.  Yet  my  mind  swirled  without  restraint,  I
daydreamed. Once, as I walked home along Corso Meridionale, with Alfonso
beside me like a squire escorting me through the thousand dangers of the city,
it seemed to me right that the duty had fallen to two Carraccis, Stefano and
him, to protect, if in different forms, Lila and me from the blackest evil in the
world, from that very evil that we had experienced for the first time going up
the stairs that led to their house, when we went to retrieve the dolls that their
father had stolen.
42.
I liked to discover connections like that, especially if they concerned Lila. I
traced  lines  between  moments  and  events  distant  from  one  another,  I
established convergences and divergences. In that period it became a daily
exercise: the better off I had been in Ischia, the worse off Lila had been in the
desolation  of  the  neighborhood;  the  more  I  had  suffered  upon  leaving  the
island, the happier she had become. It was as if, because of an evil spell, the joy
or sorrow of one required the sorrow or joy of the other; even our physical
aspect, it seemed to me, shared in that swing. In Ischia I had felt beautiful, and
the  impression  had  lingered  on  my  return  to  Naples—during  the  constant
plotting with Lila to help her get rid of Marcello, there had even been moments
when I thought again that I was prettier, and in some of Stefano’s glances I had
caught the possibility of his liking me. But Lila now had retaken the upper
hand,  satisfaction  had  magnified  her  beauty,  while  I,  overwhelmed  by
schoolwork, exhausted by my frustrated love for Nino, was growing ugly again.
My healthy color faded, the acne returned. And suddenly one morning the
specter of glasses appeared.
Professor  Gerace  questioned  me  about  something  he  had  written  on  the
blackboard, and realized that I could see almost nothing. He told me that I
must go immediately to an oculist, he would write it down in my notebook, he
expected the signature of one of my parents the next day. I went home and
showed them the notebook, full of guilt for the expense that glasses would
involve. My father darkened, my mother shouted, “You’re always with your
books, and now you’ve ruined your eyesight.” I was extremely hurt. Had I been
punished for pride in wishing to study? What about Lila? Hadn’t she read much
more  than  I  had?  So  then  why  did  she  have  perfect  vision  while  mine
deteriorated? Why should I have to wear glasses my whole life and she not?
The need for glasses intensified my mania for finding a pattern that, in good
as in evil, would bind my fate and hers: I was blind, she a falcon; I had an
opaque pupil, she narrowed her eyes, with darting glances that saw more; I
clung to her arm, among the shadows, she guided me with a stern gaze. In the
end my father, thanks to his dealings at the city hall, found the money. The
fantasies diminished. I went to the oculist, he diagnosed a severe myopia, the
glasses materialized. When I looked at myself in the mirror, the clear image
was  a  hard  blow:  blemished  skin,  broad  face,  wide  mouth,  big  nose,  eyes
imprisoned in frames that seemed to have been drawn insistently by an angry
designer under eyebrows already too thick. I felt disfigured, and decided to
wear the glasses only at home or, at most, if I had to copy something from the
blackboard. But one day, leaving school, I forgot them on the desk. I hurried
back to the classroom, the worst had happened. In the haste that seized us all
at the sound of the last bell, they had ended up on the floor: one sidepiece was
broken, a lens cracked. I began to cry.
I didn’t have the courage to go home, I took refuge with Lila. I told her what
had happened, and gave her the glasses. She examined them and said to leave
them with her. She spoke with a different sort of determination, calmer, as if it
were no longer necessary to fight to the death for every little thing. I imagined
some miraculous intervention by Rino with his shoemaker’s tools and I went
home hoping that my parents wouldn’t notice that I was without my glasses.
A few days afterward, in the late afternoon, I heard someone calling from
the courtyard. Below was Lila, she had my glasses on her nose and at first I was
struck not by the fact that they were as if new but by how well they suited her.
I ran down thinking, why is it that they look nice on her when she doesn’t need
them and they make me, who can’t do without them, look ugly? As soon as I
appeared she took off the glasses with amusement and put them on my nose
herself, exclaiming, “How nice you look, you should wear them all the time.”
She had given the glasses to Stefano, who had had them fixed by an optician in
the  city.  I  murmured  in  embarrassment  that  I  could  never  repay  her,  she
replied ironically, perhaps with a trace of malice:
“Repay in what sense?”
“Give you money.”
She smiled, then said proudly, “There’s no need, I do what I like now with
money.”
43.
Money gave even more force to the impression that what I lacked she had,
and vice versa, in a continuous game of exchanges and reversals that, now
happily, now painfully, made us indispensable to each other.
She has Stefano, I said to myself after the episode of the glasses. She snaps
her fingers and immediately has my glasses repaired. What do I have?
I answered that I had school, a privilege she had lost forever. That is my
wealth, I tried to convince myself. And in fact that year all the teachers began
to praise me again. My report cards were increasingly brilliant, and even the
correspondence course in theology went well, I got a Bible with a black cover
as a prize.
I displayed my successes as if they were my mother’s silver bracelet, and yet
I didn’t know what to do with that virtuosity. In my class there was no one to
talk to about what I read, the ideas that came into my mind. Alfonso was a
diligent student; after the failure of the preceding year he had got back on
track and was doing well in all the subjects. But when I tried to talk to him
about  The  Betrothed,  or  the  marvelous  books  I  still  borrowed  from  Maestro
Ferraro’s  library,  or  about  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  merely  listened,  and,  out  of
timidity or ignorance, never said anything that would inspire me to further
thoughts. Besides, while in school he used a good Italian; when it was just the
two of us he never abandoned dialect, and in dialect it was hard to discuss the
corruption of earthly justice, as it could be seen during the lunch at the house
of Don Rodrigo, or the relations between God, the Holy Spirit, and Jesus, who,
although  they  were  a  single  person,  when  they  were  divided  in  three,  I
thought, necessarily had to have a hierarchy, and then who came first, who
last?
I remembered what Pasquale had once said: that my high school, even if it
was a classical high school, was surely not one of the best. I concluded that he
was right. Rarely did I see my schoolmates dressed as well as the girls of Via dei
Mille. And, when school was out, you never saw elegantly dressed young men,
in cars more luxurious than those of Marcello and Stefano, waiting to pick
them up. Intellectually, too, they were deficient. The only student who had a
reputation like mine was Nino, but now, because of the coldness with which I
had treated him, he went off with his head down, he didn’t even look at me.
What to do, then?
I needed to express myself, my head was bursting. I turned to Lila, especially
when school was on vacation. We met, we talked. I told her in detail about the
classes, the teachers. She listened intently, and I hoped that she would become
curious and go back to the phase when in secret or openly she would eagerly
get the books that would allow her to keep up with me. But it never happened,
it was as if one part of her kept a tight rein on the other part. Instead she
developed a tendency to interrupt right away, in general in an ironic manner.
Once, just to give an example, I told her about my theology course and said, to
impress her with the questions that tormented me, that I didn’t know what to
think about the Holy Spirit, its function wasn’t clear to me. “Is it,” I argued
aloud,  “a  subordinate  entity,  in  the  service  of  both  God  and  Jesus,  like  a
messenger? Or an emanation of the first two, their miraculous essence? But in
the first case how can an entity who acts as a messenger possibly be one with
God and his son? Wouldn’t it be like saying that my father who is a porter at
the city hall is the same as the mayor, as Comandante Lauro? And, if you look
at the second case, well, essence, sweat, voice are part of the person from
whom they emanate: how can it make sense, then, to consider the Holy Spirit
separate from God and Jesus? Or is the Holy Spirit the most important person
and the other two his mode of being, or I don’t understand what his function
is.” Lila, I remember, was preparing to go out with Stefano: they were going to
a cinema in the center with Pinuccia, Rino, and Alfonso. I watched while she
put on a new skirt, a new jacket, and she was truly another person now, even
her ankles were no longer like sticks. Yet I saw that her eyes narrowed, as
when she tried to grasp something fleeting. She said, in dialect, “You still waste
time with those things, Lenù? We are flying over a ball of fire. The part that has
cooled floats on the lava. On that part we construct the buildings, the bridges,
and the streets, and every so often the lava comes out of Vesuvius or causes an
earthquake  that  destroys  everything.  There  are  microbes  everywhere  that
make us sick and die. There are wars. There is a poverty that makes us all cruel.
Every second something might happen that will cause you such suffering that
you’ll never have enough tears. And what are you doing? A theology course in
which you struggle to understand what the Holy Spirit is? Forget it, it was the
Devil who invented the world, not the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Do
you want to see the string of pearls that Stefano gave me?” That was how she
talked, more or less, confusing me. And not only in a situation like that but
more and more often, until that tone became established, became her way of
standing up to me. If I said something about the Very Holy Trinity, she with a
few hurried but good-humored remarks cut off any possible conversation and
went on to show me Stefano’s presents, the engagement ring, the necklace, a
new dress, a hat, while the things that I loved, that made me shine in front of
the teachers, so that they considered me clever, slumped in a corner, deprived
of their meaning. I let go of ideas, books. I went on to admire all those gifts that
contrasted with the humble house of Fernando the shoemaker; I tried on the
dresses and the jewelry; I almost immediately noticed that they would never
suit me as they did her; and I was depressed.
44.
In  the  role  of  fiancée,  Lila  was  much  envied  and  caused  quite  a  lot  of
resentment. After all, her behavior had been irritating when she was a skinny
little child, imagine now that she was a very fortunate young girl. She herself
told  me  of  an  increasing  hostility  on  the  part  of  Stefano’s  mother  and,
especially,  Pinuccia.  Their  spiteful  thoughts  were  stamped  clearly  on  their
faces. Who did the shoemaker’s daughter think she was? What evil potion had
she made Stefano drink? How was it that as soon as she opened her mouth he
opened his wallet? She wants to come and be mistress in our house?
If Maria confined herself to a surly silence, Pinuccia couldn’t contain herself,
she exploded, speaking to her brother like this: “Why do you buy all those
things for her, while for me you’ve never bought anything, and as soon as I buy
something nice you criticize me, you say I’m wasting money?”
Stefano displayed his tranquil half smile and didn’t answer. But soon, in
accord with his habit of accommodation, he began to give his sister presents,
too. Thus a contest began between the two girls, they went to the hairdresser
together,  they  bought  the  same  dresses.  This,  however,  only  embittered
Pinuccia the more. She wasn’t ugly, she was a few years older than us, maybe
her figure was more developed, but there was no comparison between the
effect made by any dress or object when Lila had it on and when Pinuccia wore
it. It was her mother who realized this first. Maria, when she saw Lila and
Pinuccia ready to go out, with the same hairstyle, in similar dresses, always
found a way to digress and, by devious means, end up criticizing her future
daughter-in-law,  with  false  good  humor,  for  something  she  had  done  days
earlier—leaving the light on in the kitchen or the tap open after getting a glass
of  water.  Then  she  turned  the  other  way,  as  if  she  had  a  lot  to  do,  and
muttered, “Be home soon.”
We  girls  of  the  neighborhood  soon  had  similar  problems.  On  holidays
Carmela, who still wanted to be called Carmen, and Ada and Gigliola started
dressing  up,  without  admitting  it,  without  admitting  it  to  themselves,  in
competition with Lila. Gigliola in particular, who worked in the pastry shop,
and who, although she wasn’t officially with Michele Solara, bought and had
him buy pretty things, just to show off on walks or in the car. But there was no
contest, Lila seemed inaccessible, a dazzling figurine against the light.
At first we tried to keep her, to impose on her the old habits. We drew
Stefano into our group, embraced him, coddled him, and he seemed pleased,
and so one Saturday, perhaps impelled by his sympathy for Antonio and Ada,
he said to Lila, “See if Lenuccia and Melina’s children will come and eat with us
tomorrow evening.” By “us” he meant the two of them plus Pinuccia and Rino,
who  now  liked  to  spend  his  free  time  with  his  future  brother-in-law.  We
accepted, but it was a difficult evening. Ada, afraid of making a bad impression,
borrowed a dress from Gigliola. Stefano and Rino chose not a pizzeria but a
restaurant in Santa Lucia. Neither I nor Antonio nor Ada had ever been in a
restaurant,  it  was  something  for  rich  people,  and  we  were  overcome  by
anxiety: how should we dress, what would it cost? While the four of them went
in the Giardinetta, we took the bus to Piazza Plebiscito and walked the rest of
the way. At the restaurant, they casually ordered many dishes, and we almost
nothing, out of fear that the bill would be more than we could afford. We were
almost silent the whole time, because Rino and Stefano talked, mainly about
money, and never thought of involving even Antonio in their conversations.
Ada, not resigned to marginality, tried all evening to attract Stefano’s attention
by flirting outrageously, which upset her brother. Then, when it was time to
pay, we discovered that Stefano had already taken care of the bill, and, while it
didn’t bother Rino at all, Antonio went home in a rage, because although he
was the same age as Stefano and Lila’s brother, although he worked as they did,
he felt he had been treated like a pauper. But the most significant thing was
that Ada and I, with different feelings, realized that in a public place, outside of
our intimate, neighborhood relationship, we didn’t know what to say to Lila,
how  to  treat  her.  She  was  so  well  dressed,  so  carefully  made  up,  that  she
seemed right for the Giardinetta, the convertible, the restaurant in Santa Lucia,
but physically unsuited now to go on the metro with us, to travel on the bus, to
walk around the neighborhood, to get a pizza in Corso Garibaldi, to go to the
parish cinema, to dance at Gigliola’s house.
That evening it became evident that Lila was changing her circumstances. In
the days, the months, she became a young woman who imitated the models in
the fashion magazines, the girls on television, the ladies she had seen walking
on Via Chiaia. When you saw her, she gave off a glow that seemed a violent slap
in the face of the poverty of the neighborhood. The girl’s body, of which there
were still traces when we had woven the plot that led to her engagement to
Stefano,  was  soon  banished  to  dark  lands.  In  the  light  of  the  sun  she  was
instead a young woman who, when on Sundays she went out on the arm of her
fiancé, seemed to apply the terms of their agreement as a couple, and Stefano,
with his gifts, seemed to wish to demonstrate to the neighborhood that, if Lila
was beautiful, she could always be more so; and she seemed to have discovered
the joy of dipping into the inexhaustible well of her beauty, and to feel and
show  that  no  shape,  however  beautifully  drawn,  could  contain  her
conclusively, since a new hairstyle, a new dress, a new way of making up her
eyes  or  her  mouth  were  only  more  expansive  outlines  that  dissolved  the
preceding ones. Stefano seemed to seek in her the most palpable symbol of the
future of wealth and power that he intended; and she seemed to use the seal
that he was placing on her to make herself, her brother, her parents, her other
relatives safe from all that she had confusedly confronted and challenged since
she was a child.
I still didn’t know anything about what she secretly called, in herself, after
the bad experience of New Year’s, dissolving margins. But I knew the story of
the exploded pot, it was always lying in ambush in some corner of my mind; I
thought about it over and over again. And I remember that, one night at home,
I reread the letter she had sent me on Ischia. How seductive was her way of
talking about herself and how distant it seemed now. I had to acknowledge
that the Lila who had written those words had disappeared. In the letter there
was still the girl who had written The Blue Fairy, who had learned Latin and
Greek on her own, who had consumed half of Maestro Ferraro’s library, even
the girl who had drawn the shoes framed and hanging in the shoe store. But in
the life of every day I no longer saw her, no longer heard her. The tense,
aggressive Cerullo was as if immolated. Although we both continued to live in
the same neighborhood, although we had had the same childhood, although
we  were  both  living  our  fifteenth  year,  we  had  suddenly  ended  up  in  two
different worlds. I was becoming, as the months ran by, a sloppy, disheveled,
spectacled girl bent over tattered books that gave off a moldy odor, volumes
bought at great sacrifice at the secondhand store or obtained from Maestra
Oliviero. She went around on Stefano’s arm in the clothes of an actress or a
princess, her hair styled like a diva’s.
I looked at her from the window, and felt that her earlier shape had broken,
and I thought again of that wonderful passage of the letter, of the cracked and
crumpled copper. It was an image that I used all the time, whenever I noticed a
fracture in her or in me. I knew—perhaps I hoped—that no form could ever
contain Lila, and that sooner or later she would break everything again.
45.
After the terrible evening in the restaurant in Santa Lucia there were no
more occasions like that, and not because the boyfriends didn’t ask us again
but because we now got out of it with one excuse or another. Instead, when I
wasn’t exhausted by my homework, I let myself be drawn out to a dance at
someone’s  house,  to  have  a  pizza  with  the  old  group.  I  preferred  to  go,
however, only when I was sure that Antonio would come; for a while he had
been courting me, discreetly, attentively. True, his face was shiny and full of
blackheads, his teeth here and there were bluish; he had broad hands and
strong  fingers—he  had  once  effortlessly  unscrewed  the  screws  on  the
punctured tire of an old car that Pasquale had acquired. But he had black wavy
hair that made you want to caress it, and although he was very shy the rare
times he opened his mouth he said something witty. Besides, he was the only
one who noticed me. Enzo seldom appeared; he had a life of which we knew
little or nothing, and when he was there he devoted himself, in his detached,
slow way, and never excessively, to Carmela. As for Pasquale, he seemed to
have lost interest in girls after Lila’s rejection. He took very little notice even of
Ada, who flirted with him tirelessly, even if she kept saying that she couldn’t
stand always seeing our mean faces.
Naturally on those evenings we sooner or later ended up talking about Lila,
even if it seemed that no one wanted to name her: the boys were all a little
disappointed, each one would have liked to be in Stefano’s place. But the most
unhappy was Pasquale: if his hatred for the Solaras hadn’t been of such long
standing, he would probably have sided publicly with Marcello against  the
Cerullo family. His sufferings in love had dug deep inside him and a mere
glimpse of Lila and Stefano together dimmed his joy in life. Yet he was by
nature honest and good-hearted, so he was careful to keep his reactions under
control and to take sides according to what was just. When he found out that
Marcello  and  Michele  had  confronted  Rino  one  evening,  and  though  they
hadn’t laid a finger on him had grossly insulted him, Pasquale had entirely
taken Rino’s part. When he found out that Silvio Solara, the father of Michele
and  Marcello,  had  gone  in  person  to  Fernando’s  renovated  shoe  store  and
calmly reproached him for not having brought up his daughter properly, and
then, looking around, had observed that the shoemaker could make all the
shoes he wanted, but then where would he sell them, he would never find a
store that would take them, not to mention that with all that glue around, with
all that thread and pitch and wooden forms and soles and heels, it wouldn’t
take much to start a fire, Pasquale had promised that, if there was a fire at the
Cerullo shoe shop, he would go with a few trusted companions and burn down
the Solara bar and pastry shop. But he was critical of Lila. He said that she
should have run away from home rather than allow Marcello to go there and
court her all those evenings. He said she should have smashed the television
with a hammer and not watched it with anyone who knew that he had bought
it only to have her. He said, finally, that she was a girl too intelligent to be truly
in love with a hypocritical idiot like Stefano Carracci.
On  those  occasions  I  was  the  only  one  who  did  not  remain  silent  but
explicitly disagreed with Pasquale’s criticisms. I refuted him, saying things like:
It’s not easy to leave home; it’s not easy to go against the wishes of the people
you love; nothing is easy, especially when you criticize her rather than being
angry  at  your  friend  Rino—he’s  the  one  who  got  her  in  that  trouble  with
Marcello, and if Lila hadn’t found a way of getting out of it, she would have had
to marry Marcello. I concluded by praising Stefano, who of all the boys who
had known Lila since she was a child and loved her was the only one with the
courage to support her and help her. A terrible silence fell and I was very
proud of having countered every criticism of my friend in a tone and language
that, among other things, had subdued him.
But one night we ended up quarreling unpleasantly. We were all, including
Enzo, having a pizza on the Rettifilo, in a place where a margherita and a beer
cost fifty lire. This time it was the girls who started: Ada, I think, said she
thought Lila was ridiculous going around always fresh from the hairdresser
and  in  clothes  like  Princess  Soraya,  even  though  she  was  sprinkling  roach
poison in front of the house door. We all, some more, some less, laughed. Then,
one thing leading to another, Carmela ended up saying outright that Lila had
gone with Stefano for the money, to settle her brother and the rest of the
family. I was starting my usual official defense when Pasquale interrupted me
and said, “That’s not the point. The point is that Lina knows where that money
comes from.”
“Now  you  want  to  drag  in  Don  Achille  and  the  black  market  and  the
trafficking  and  loan  sharking  and  all  the  nonsense  of  before  and  after  the
war?” I said.
“Yes, and if your friend were here now she would say I was right.”
“Stefano is just a shopkeeper who’s a good salesman.”
“And  the  money  he  put  into  the  Cerullos’  shoe  store  he  got  from  the
grocery?”
“Why, what do you think?”
“It comes from the gold objects taken from mothers and hidden by Don
Achille in the mattress. Lina acts the lady with the blood of all the poor people
of this neighborhood. And she is kept, she and her whole family, even before
she’s married.”
I was about to answer when Enzo interrupted with his usual detachment:
“Excuse me, Pascà, what do you mean by ‘is kept’?”
As  soon  as  I  heard  that  question  I  knew  that  things  would  turn  ugly.
Pasquale turned red, embarrassed. “Keep means keep. Who pays, please, when
Lina  goes  to  the  hairdresser,  when  she  buys  dresses  and  purses?  Who  put
money into the shoe shop so that the shoe-repair man can play at making
shoes?”
“Are  you  saying  that  Lina  isn’t  in  love,  isn’t  engaged,  won’t  soon  marry
Stefano, but has sold herself?”
We were all quiet. Antonio murmured, “No, Enzo, Pasquale doesn’t mean
that; you know that he loves Lina as we all of us love her.”
Enzo nodded at him to be quiet.
“Be quiet, Anto’, let Pasquale answer.”
Pasquale said grimly, “Yes, she sold herself. And she doesn’t give a damn
about the stink of the money she spends every day.”
I tried again to have my say, at that point, but Enzo touched my arm.
“Excuse  me,  Lenù,  I  want  to  know  what  Pasquale  calls  a  girl  who  sells
herself.”
Here Pasquale had an outburst of violence that we all read in his eyes and he
said  what  for  months  he  had  wanted  to  say,  to  shout  out  to  the  whole
neighborhood: “Whore, I call her a whore. Lina has behaved and is behaving
like a whore.”
Enzo got up and said, almost in a whisper: “Come outside.”
Antonio  jumped  up,  restrained  Pasquale,  who  was  getting  up,  and  said,
“Now, let’s not overdo it, Enzo. Pasquale is only saying something that’s not an
accusation, it’s a criticism that we’d all like to make.”
Enzo answered, this time aloud, “Not me.” And he headed toward the door,
announcing, “I’ll wait outside for both of you.”
We kept Pasquale and Antonio from following him, and nothing happened.
They didn’t speak for several days, then everything was as before.
46.
I’ve  recounted  that  quarrel  to  say  how  that  year  passed  and  what  the
atmosphere was around Lila’s choices, especially among the young men who
had secretly or explicitly loved her, desired her, and in all probability loved
and desired her still. As for me, it’s hard to say in what tangle of feelings I
found myself. I always defended Lila, and I liked doing so, I liked to hear myself
speak with the authority of one who is studying difficult subjects. But I also
knew  that  I  could  have  just  as  well  recounted,  and  willingly,  if  with  some
exaggeration, how Lila had really been behind each of Stefano’s moves, and I
with her, linking step to step as if it were a mathematics problem, to achieve
that result: to settle herself, settle her brother, attempt to realize the plan of
the shoe factory, and even get money to repair my glasses if they broke.
I passed Fernando’s old workshop and felt a vicarious sense of triumph. Lila,
clearly, had made it. The shoemaker’s shop, which had never had a sign, now
displayed over the door a kind of plaque that said “Cerullo.” Fernando, Rino,
the three apprentices worked at joining, stitching, hammering, polishing, bent
over their benches from morning till late at night. It was known that father
and  son  often  quarreled.  It  was  known  that  Fernando  maintained  that  the
shoes, especially the women’s, couldn’t be made as Lila had invented them,
that they were only a child’s fantasy. It was known that Rino maintained the
opposite and that he went to Lila to ask her to intervene. It was known that
Lila said she didn’t want to know about it, and so Rino went to Stefano and
dragged him to the shop to give his father specific orders. It was known that
Stefano went in and looked for a long time at Lila’s designs framed on the
walls, smiled to himself and said tranquilly that he wanted the shoes to be
exactly  as  they  were  in  those  pictures,  he  had  hung  them  there  for  that
purpose. It was known, in short, that things were proceeding slowly, that the
workers  first  received  instructions  from  Fernando  and  then  Rino  changed
them  and  everything  stopped  and  started  over,  and  Fernando  noticed  the
changes and changed them back, and Stefano arrived and so back to square
one: they ended up yelling, breaking things.
I glanced in and immediately fled. But the pictures hanging on the walls
made an impression. Those drawings, for Lila, were fantasies, I thought. Money
has nothing to do with it, selling has nothing to do with it. All that activity is
the result of a whim of hers, celebrated by Stefano merely out of love. She’s
lucky to be so loved, to love. Lucky to be adored for what she is and for what
she invents. Now that she’s given her brother what he wanted, now that she’s
taken him out of danger, surely she’ll invent something else. So I don’t want to
lose sight of her. Something will happen.
But  nothing  happened.  Lila  established  herself  in  the  role  of  Stefano’s
fiancée. And even in our conversations, when she had time to talk, she seemed
satisfied with what she had become, as if she no longer saw anything beyond it,
didn’t want to see anything beyond it, except marriage, a house, children.
I  was  disappointed.  She  seemed  sweeter,  without  the  hardness  she  had
always  had.  I  realized  this  later,  when  through  Gigliola  Spagnuolo  I  heard
disgraceful rumors about her. Gigliola said to me rancorously, in dialect, “Now
your friend is acting like a princess. But does Stefano know that when Marcello
went to her house she gave him a blow job every night?”
I didn’t know what a blow job was. The term had been familiar to me since I
was a child but the sound of it recalled only a kind of disfigurement, something
very humiliating.
“It’s not true.”
“Marcello says so.”
“He’s a liar.”
“Yes? And would he lie even to his brother?”
“Did Michele tell you?”
“Yes.”
I hoped that those rumors wouldn’t reach Stefano. Every day when I came
home from school I said to myself: maybe I should warn Lila, before something
bad happens. But I was afraid she would be furious and that, because of how
she had grown up, because of how she was made, she would go directly to
Marcello Solara with the shoemaker’s knife. But in the end I decided: it was
better  to  report  to  her  what  I  had  learned,  so  she  would  be  prepared  to
confront the situation. But I discovered that she already knew about it. Not
only  that:  she  was  better  informed  than  me  about  what  a  blow  job  was.  I
realized it from the fact that she used a clearer formulation to tell me it was so
disgusting to her that she would never do it to any man, let alone Marcello
Solara. Then she told me that Stefano had heard the rumor and he had asked
her what type of relations she had had with Marcello during the period when
he went to the Cerullo house. She had said angrily, “None, are you crazy?” And
Stefano  had  said  immediately  that  he  believed  her,  that  he  had  never  had
doubts, that he had asked the question only to let her know that Marcello was
saying obscene things about her. Yet he seemed distracted, like someone who,
even against his will, is following scenes of disaster that are forming in his
mind. Lila had realized it and they had discussed it for a long time, she had
confessed that she, too, felt a need for revenge. But what was the use? After
talk and more talk, they had decided by mutual consent to rise a step above the
Solaras, above the logic of the neighborhood.
“A step above?” I asked, marveling.
“Yes, to ignore them: Marcello, his brother, the father, the grandfather, all
of them. Act as if they didn’t exist.”
So Stefano had continued to go to work, without defending the honor of his
fiancée, Lila had continued her life as a fiancée without resorting to the knife
or  anything  else,  the  Solaras  had  continued  to  spread  obscenities.  I  was
astonished. What was happening? I didn’t understand. The Solaras’ behavior
seemed more comprehensible, it seemed to me consistent with the world that
we had known since we were children. What, instead, did she and Stefano have
in mind, where did they think they were living? They were behaving in a way
that wasn’t familiar even in the poems that I studied in school, in the novels I
read. I was puzzled. They weren’t reacting to the insults, even to that truly
intolerable insult that the Solaras were making. They displayed kindness and
politeness  toward  everyone,  as  if  they  were  John  and  Jacqueline  Kennedy
visiting a neighborhood of indigents. When they went out walking together,
and he put an arm around her shoulders, it seemed that none of the old rules
were valid for them: they laughed, they joked, they embraced, they kissed each
other on the lips. I saw them speeding around in the convertible, alone even in
the evening, always dressed like movie stars, and I thought, They go wherever
they want, without a chaperone, and not secretly but with the consent of their
parents, with the consent of Rino, and do whatever they like, without caring
what people say. Was it Lila who had persuaded Stefano to behave in a way
that was making them the most admired and most talked about couple in the
neighborhood?  Was  this  her  latest  invention?  Did  she  want  to  leave  the
neighborhood by staying in the neighborhood? Did she want to drag us out of
ourselves, tear off the old skin and put on a new one, suitable for what she was
inventing?
47.
Everything returned abruptly to the usual track when the rumors about Lila
reached  Pasquale.  It  happened  one  Sunday,  when  Carmela,  Enzo,  Pasquale,
Antonio,  and  I  were  walking  along  the  stradone.  Antonio  said,  “I  hear  that
Marcello Solara is telling everyone that Lina was with him.”
Enzo didn’t blink. Pasquale immediately flared up: “Was how?”
Antonio  was  embarrassed  by  my  and  Carmela’s  presence  and  said,  “You
understand.”
They moved away, to talk among themselves. I saw and heard that Pasquale
was increasingly enraged, that Enzo was becoming physically more compact,
as if he no longer had arms, legs, neck, as if he were a block of hard material.
Why is it, I wondered, that they are so angry? Lila isn’t a sister of theirs or even
a cousin. And yet they feel it’s their duty to be indignant, all three of them,
more than Stefano, much more than Stefano, as if they were the true fiancés.
Pasquale especially seemed ridiculous. He who only a short time before had
said what he had said shouted, at one point, and we heard him clearly, with our
own ears: “I’ll smash the face of that shit, calling her a whore. Even if Stefano
allows it, I’m not going to allow it.” Then silence, they rejoined us, and we
wandered aimlessly, I talking to Antonio, Carmela between her brother and
Enzo. After a while they took us home. I saw them going off, Enzo, who was the
shortest, in the middle, flanked by Antonio and Pasquale.
The next day and on those which followed there was a big uproar about the
Solaras’ 1100. It had been demolished. Not only that: the two brothers had been
savagely beaten, but they couldn’t say by whom. They swore they had been
attacked  on  a  dark  street  by  at  least  ten  people,  men  from  outside  the
neighborhood. But Carmela and I knew very well that there were only three
attackers, and we were worried. We waited for the inevitable reprisal, one day,
two, three. But evidently things had been done right. Pasquale continued as a
construction worker, Antonio as a mechanic, Enzo made his rounds with the
cart. The Solaras, instead, for some time went around only on foot, battered, a
little dazed, always with four or five of their friends. I admit that seeing them
in that condition pleased me. I was proud of my friends. Along with Carmen
and Ada I criticized Stefano and also Rino because they had acted as if nothing
had  happened.  Then  time  passed,  Marcello  and  Michele  bought  a  green
Giulietta and began to act like masters of the neighborhood again. Alive and
well, bigger bullies than before. A sign that perhaps Lila was right: with people
like that, you had to fight them by living a superior life, such as they couldn’t
even imagine. While I was taking my exams in the second year of high school,
she told me that in the spring, when she was barely sixteen and a half, she
would be married.
48.
This news upset me. When Lila told me about her wedding it was June, just
before my oral exams. It was predictable, of course, but now that a date had
been fixed, March 12th, it was as if I had been strolling absentmindedly and
banged into a door. I had petty thoughts. I counted the months: nine. Maybe
nine  months  was  long  enough  so  that  Pinuccia’s  treacherous  resentment,
Maria’s hostility, Marcello Solara’s gossip—which continued to fly from mouth
to mouth throughout the neighborhood, like Fama in the Aeneid—would wear
Stefano down, leading him to break the engagement. I was ashamed of myself,
but I was no longer able to trace a coherent design in the division of our fates.
The  concreteness  of  that  date  made  concrete  the  crossroads  that  would
separate our lives. And, what was worse, I took it for granted that her fate
would be better than mine. I felt more strongly than ever the meaninglessness
of school, I knew clearly that I had embarked on that path years earlier only to
seem enviable to Lila. And now instead books had no importance for her. I
stopped preparing for my exams, I didn’t sleep that night. I thought of my
meager experience of love: I had kissed Gino once, I had scarcely grazed Nino’s
lips, I had endured the fleeting and ugly contact of his father: that was it.
Whereas Lila, starting in March, at sixteen, would have a husband and within a
year, at seventeen, a child, and then another, and another, and another. I felt I
was a shadow, I wept in despair.
The next day I went unwillingly to take the exams. But something happened
that made me feel better. Professor Gerace and Professor Galiani, who were
part  of  the  committee,  praised  my  Italian  paper  to  the  skies.  Gerace  in
particular said that my exposition was further improved. He wanted to read a
passage to the rest of the committee. And only as I listened did I realize what I
had tried to do in those months whenever I had to write: to free myself from
my artificial tones, from sentences that were too rigid; to try for a fluid and
engaging style like Lila’s in the Ischia letter. When I heard my words in the
teacher’s  voice,  with  Professor  Galiani  listening  and  silently  nodding
agreement, I realized that I had succeeded. Naturally it wasn’t Lila’s way of
writing, it was mine. And it seemed to my teachers something truly out of the
ordinary.
I was promoted to the third year with all tens, but at home no one was
surprised  or  celebrated  me.  I  saw  that  they  were  satisfied,  yes,  and  I  was
pleased, but they gave the event no weight. My mother, in fact, found my
scholastic success completely natural, my father told me to go right away to
Maestra Oliviero to ask her to get ahead of time the books for next year. As I
went out my mother cried, “And if she wants to send you to Ischia again, tell
her that I’m not well and you have to help me in the house.”
The teacher praised me, but carelessly, partly because by now she took my
ability for granted, partly because she wasn’t well, the illness she had in her
mouth  was  very  troublesome.  She  never  mentioned  my  need  to  rest,  her
cousin Nella, Ischia. Instead, surprisingly, she began to talk about Lila. She had
seen her on the street, from a distance. She was with her fiancé, she said, the
grocer. Then she added a sentence that I will always remember: “The beauty of
mind that Cerullo had from childhood didn’t find an outlet, Greco, and it has all
ended up in her face, in her breasts, in her thighs, in her ass, places where it
soon fades and it will be as if she had never had it.”
I had never heard her say a rude word since I had known her. That day she
said “ass,” and then muttered, “Excuse me.” But that wasn’t what struck me. It
was the regret, as if the teacher were realizing that something of Lila had been
ruined because she, as a teacher, hadn’t protected and nurtured it well. I felt
that I was her most successful student and went away relieved.
The only one who congratulated me without reserve was Alfonso, who had
also been promoted, with all sevens. I felt that his admiration was genuine, and
this gave me pleasure. In front of the posted grades, in the presence of our
schoolmates  and  their  parents,  he,  in  his  excitement,  did  something
inappropriate, as if he had forgotten that I was a girl and he wasn’t supposed to
touch me: he hugged me tight, and kissed me on the cheek, a noisy kiss. Then
he became confused, apologized, and yet he couldn’t contain himself, he cried,
“All tens, impossible, all tens.” On the way home we talked a lot about the
wedding of his brother, of Lila. Since I felt especially at ease, I asked him for the
first time what he thought of his future sister-in-law. He took some time before
he answered. Then he said:
“You remember the competitions they made us do at school?”
“Who could forget them?”
“I was sure I would win, you were all afraid of my father.”
“Lina, too: in fact for a while she tried not to beat you.”
“Yes, but then she decided to win and she humiliated me. I went home
crying.”
“It’s not nice to lose.”
“Not because of that: it seemed to me intolerable that everyone was terrified
of my father, me first of all, and that girl wasn’t.”
“Were you in love with her?”
“Are you kidding? She always made me uncomfortable.”
“In what sense?”
“In the sense that my brother really shows some courage in marrying her.”
“What do you mean?”
“I mean that you are better, and that if it were me choosing I would marry
you.”
This, too, pleased me. We burst out laughing, we said goodbye, still laughing.
He was condemned to spend the summer in the grocery store, I, thanks to a
decision of my mother more than my father, had to find a job for the summer.
We promised to meet, to go at least once to the beach together. We didn’t.
In the following days I reluctantly made the rounds of the neighborhood. I
asked Don Paolo, the pharmacist on the stradone, if he needed a clerk. No. I
asked  the  newspaper  seller:  I  wasn’t  useful  to  him,  either.  I  went  by  the
stationer’s,  she  started  laughing:  she  needed  someone,  yes,  but  not  now.  I
should come back in the fall when school began. I was about to go and she
called me back. She said, “You’re a serious girl, Lenù, I trust you: would you be
able to take my girls swimming?”
I was really happy when I left the shop. The stationer would pay me—and
pay well—if I took her three little girls to the beach for the month of July and
the first ten days of August. Sea, sun, and money. I was to go every day to a
place between Mergellina and Posillipo that I knew nothing about, it had a
foreign name: Sea Garden. I went home in great excitement, as if my life had
taken  a  decisive  turn.  I  would  earn  money  for  my  parents,  I  would  go
swimming, I would become smooth and golden in the sun as I had during the
summer in Ischia. How sweet everything is, I thought, when the day is fine and
every good thing seems to be waiting for you alone.
I had gone a short distance when that impression of privileged hours was
solidified.  Antonio  joined  me,  in  his  grease-stained  overalls.  I  was  pleased,
whoever I had met at that moment of happiness would have been greeted
warmly. He had seen me passing and had run after me. I told him about the
stationer, he must have read in my face that it was a happy moment. For
months I had been grinding away, feeling alone, ugly. Although I was sure I
loved Nino Sarratore, I had always avoided him and hadn’t even gone to see if
he had been promoted, and with what grades. Lila was about to complete a
definitive leap beyond my life, I would no longer be able to follow her. But now
I felt good and I wanted to feel even better. When Antonio, guessing that I was
in the right mood, asked if I wanted to be his girlfriend, I said yes right away,
even though I loved someone else, even if I felt for him nothing but some
friendliness. To have him as a boyfriend, he who was an adult, the same age as
Stefano, a worker, seemed to me a thing not different from being promoted
with all tens, from the job of taking, with pay, the daughters of the stationer to
the Sea Garden.
49.
My job began, and life with a boyfriend. The stationer gave me a sort of bus
pass, and every morning I crossed the city with the three little girls, on the
crowded buses, and took them to that bright-colored place of beach umbrellas,
blue sea, concrete platforms, students, well-off women with a lot of free time,
showy women, with greedy faces. I was polite to the attendants who tried to
start conversations. I looked after the children, taking them for long swims,
and showing off the bathing suit that Nella had made for me the year before. I
fed them, played with them, let them drink endlessly at the jet of a stone
fountain, taking care that they didn’t slip and break their teeth on the basin.
We  got  back  to  the  neighborhood  in  the  late  afternoon.  I  returned  the
children to the stationer, and hurried to my secret date with Antonio, burned
by the sun, salty from the sea water. We went to the ponds by back streets, I
was afraid of being seen by my mother and, perhaps still more, by Maestra
Oliviero. With him I exchanged my first real kisses. I soon let him touch my
breasts and between my legs. One evening I touched his penis, straining, large,
inside his pants, and when he took it out I held it willingly in one hand while
we kissed. I accepted those practices with two very clear questions in my mind.
The first was: does Lila do these things with Stefano? The second was: is the
pleasure I feel with Antonio the same that I felt the night Donato Sarratore
touched me? In both cases Antonio was ultimately only a useful phantom to
evoke on the one hand the love between Lila and Stefano, on the other the
strong emotion, difficult to categorize, that Nino’s father had inspired in me.
But I  never felt  guilty. Antonio  was  so grateful  to me,  he showed  such  an
absolute dependence on me for those few moments of contact at the ponds,
that I soon convinced myself that it was he who was indebted to me, that the
pleasure I gave him was by far superior to that which he gave me.
Sometimes, on Sunday, he went with me and the children to the Sea Garden.
He spent money with pretended casualness, though he earned very little, and
he also hated getting sunburned. But he did it for me, just to be near me,
without any immediate reward, since there was no way to kiss or touch each
other.  And  he  entertained  the  children,  with  clowning  and  athletic  diving.
While he played with them I lay in the sun reading, dissolving into the pages
like a jellyfish.
One of those times I looked up for a second and saw a tall, slender, graceful
girl in a stunning red bikini. It was Lila. By now she was used to having men’s
gaze on her, she moved as if there were no one in that crowded place, not even
the young attendant who went ahead of her, leading her to her umbrella. She
didn’t  see  me  and  I  didn’t  know  whether  to  call  her.  She  was  wearing
sunglasses, she carried a purse of bright-colored fabric. I hadn’t yet told her
about my job or even about Antonio: probably I was afraid of her judgment of
both. Let’s wait for her to notice me, I thought, and turned back to my book,
but I was unable to read. Soon I looked in her direction again. The attendant
had opened the chaise, she was sitting in the sun. Meanwhile Stefano was
arriving, very white, in a blue bathing suit, in his hand his wallet, lighter,
cigarettes. He kissed Lila on the lips the way princes kiss sleeping beauties, and
also sat down on a chaise.
Again I tried to read. I had long been used to self-discipline and this time for
a  few  minutes  I  really  did  manage  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  the  words,  I
remember that the novel was Oblomov. When I looked up again Stefano was still
sitting, staring at the sea, Lila had disappeared. I searched for her and saw that
she was talking to Antonio, and Antonio was pointing to me. I gave her a warm
wave to which she responded as warmly, and she turned to call Stefano.
We went swimming, the three of us, while Antonio watched the stationer’s
daughters. It was a day of seeming cheerfulness. At one point Stefano took us
to the bar, ordered all kinds of things: sandwiches, drinks, ice cream, and the
children immediately abandoned Antonio and turned their attention to him.
When  the  two  young  men  began  to  talk  about  some  problems  with  the
convertible, a conversation in which Antonio had a lot to say, I took the little
girls away so that they wouldn’t bother them. Lila joined me.
“How much does the stationer pay you?” she asked.
I told her.
“Not much.”
“My mother thinks she pays me too much.”
“You should assert yourself, Lenù.”
“I’ll assert myself when I take your children to the beach.”
“I’ll give you treasure chests full of gold pieces, I know the value of spending
time with you.”
I looked at her to see if she was joking. She wasn’t joking, but she joked right
afterward when she mentioned Antonio: “Does he know your value?”
“We’ve been together for three weeks.”
“Do you love him?”
“No.”
“So?”
I challenged her with a look.
“Do you love Stefano?”
She said seriously, “Very much.”
“More than your parents, more than Rino?”
“More than everyone, but not more than you.”
“You’re making fun of me.”
But meanwhile I thought: even if she’s kidding, it’s nice to talk like this, in
the sun, sitting on the warm concrete, with our feet in the water; never mind if
she didn’t ask what book I’m reading; never mind if she didn’t find out how the
exams  went.  Maybe  it’s  not  all  over:  even  after  she’s  married,  something
between us will endure. I said to her: “I come here every day. Why don’t you
come, too?”
She was enthusiastic about the idea, she spoke to Stefano about it and he
agreed. It was a beautiful day on which all of us, miraculously, felt at our ease.
Then the sun began to go down, it was time to take the children home. Stefano
went to pay and discovered that Antonio had taken care of everything. He was
really sorry, he thanked him wholeheartedly. On the street, as soon as Stefano
and Lila went off in the convertible, I reproached him. Melina and Ada washed
the stairs of the buildings, he earned practically nothing in the garage.
“Why did you pay?” I almost yelled at him, in dialect, angrily.
“Because you and I are better-looking and more refined,” he answered.
50.
I grew fond of Antonio almost without realizing it. Our sexual games became
a little bolder, a little more pleasurable. I thought that if Lila came again to the
Sea Garden I would ask her what happened between her and Stefano when
they went off in the car alone. Did they do the same things that Antonio and I
did or more, for example the things that the rumors started by the two Solaras
said she did? I had no one to compare myself with except her. But there was no
chance to ask her those questions, she didn’t come back to the Sea Garden.
In mid-August my job was over and, with it, the joy of sun and sea. The
stationer was extremely satisfied with the way I had taken care of the children
and although they, in spite of my instructions, had told their mother that
sometimes a young man who was my friend came to the beach, with whom
they did some lovely dives, instead of reproaching me embraced me, saying,
“Thank goodness, let go a little, please, you’re too sensible for your age. And
she added maliciously, “Think of Lina Cerullo, all she gets up to.”
At the ponds that evening I said to Antonio, “It’s always been like that, since
we were little: everyone thinks she’s bad and I’m good.”
He kissed me, murmuring ironically, “Why, isn’t that true?”
That response touched me and kept me from telling him that we had to part.
It was a decision that seemed to me urgent, the affection wasn’t love, I loved
Nino, I knew I would love him forever. I had a gentle speech prepared for
Antonio, I wanted to say to him: It’s been wonderful, you helped me a lot at a
time when I was sad, but now school is starting and this year is going to be
difficult, I have new subjects, I’ll have to study a lot; I’m sorry but we have to
stop. I felt it was necessary and every afternoon I went to our meeting at the
ponds with my little speech ready. But he was so affectionate, so passionate,
that my courage failed and I put it off. In the middle of August. By the end of
the month. I said: you can’t kiss, touch a person and be touched, and be only a
little fond of him; Lila loves Stefano very much, I did not love Antonio.
The time passed and I could never find the right moment to speak to him. He
was worried. In the heat Melina generally got worse, but in the second half of
August the deterioration became very noticeable. Sarratore returned to her
mind, whom she called Donato. She said she had seen him, she said he had
come to get her; her children didn’t know how to soothe her. I became anxious
that Sarratore really had appeared on the streets of the neighborhood and that
he was looking not for Melina but for me. At night I woke with a start, under
the impression that he had come in through the window and was in the room.
Then  I  calmed  down,  I  thought:  he  must  be  on  vacation  in  Barano,  at  the
Maronti, not here, in this heat, with the flies, the dust.
But one morning when I was going to do the shopping I heard my name
called. I turned and at first I didn’t recognize him. Then I brought into focus
the black mustache, the pleasing features gilded by the sun, the thin-lipped
mouth. I kept going, he followed me. He said that he had been pained not to
find me at Nella’s house, in Barano, that summer. He said that he thought only
of me, that he couldn’t live without me. He said that to give a form to our love
he had written many poems and would like to read them to me. He said that he
wanted to see me, talk to me at leisure, that if I refused he would kill himself.
Then I stopped and whispered that he had to leave me alone, I had a boyfriend,
I never wanted to see him again. He despaired. He murmured that he would
wait for me forever, that every day at noon he would be at the entrance to the
tunnel on the stradone. I shook my head forcefully: I would never go there. He
leaned forward to kiss me, I jumped back with a gesture of disgust, he gave a
disappointed smile. He murmured, “You’re clever, you’re sensitive, I’ll bring
you the poems I like best,” and he went off.
I was very frightened, I didn’t know what to do. I decided to turn to Antonio.
That  evening,  at  the  ponds,  I  told  him  that  his  mother  was  right,  Donato
Sarratore was wandering around the neighborhood. He had stopped me in the
street. He had asked me to tell Melina that he would wait for her always, every
day, at the entrance to the tunnel, at midday. Antonio turned somber, he said,
“What should I do?” I told him that I would go with him to the appointment
and that together we would give Sarratore a candid speech about the state of
his mother’s health.
I was too worried to sleep that night. The next day we went to the tunnel.
Antonio was silent, he seemed in no hurry, I felt he had a weight on him that
was slowing him down. One part of him was furious and the other subdued. I
thought angrily, He was capable of confronting the Solaras for his sister Ada,
for Lila, but now he’s intimidated, in his eyes Donato Sarratore is an important
person, of a certain standing. To feel him like that made me more determined, I
would have liked to shake him, shout at him: You haven’t written a book but
you are much better than that man. I merely took his arm.
When Sarratore saw us from a distance he tried to disappear quickly into the
darkness of the tunnel. I called him: “Signor Sarratore.”
He turned reluctantly.
Using the formal lei, something that at the time was unusual in our world, I
said, “I don’t know if you remember Antonio, he is the oldest son of Signora
Melina.”
Sarratore pulled out a bright, very affectionate voice: “Of course I remember
him, hello, Antonio.”
“He and I are together.”
“Ah, good.”
“And we’ve talked a lot—now he’ll explain to you.”
Antonio understood that his moment had arrived and, extremely pale and
tense, he said, struggling to speak in Italian, “I am very pleased to see you,
Signor Sarratore, I haven’t forgotten. I will always be grateful for what you did
for us after the death of my father. I thank you in particular for having found
me a job in Signor Gorresio’s shop. I owe it to you if I have learned a trade.”
“Tell him about your mother,” I pressed him, nervously.
He was annoyed, and gestured at me to be quiet. He continued, “However,
you  no  longer  live  in  the  neighborhood  and  you  don’t  understand  the
situation. My mother, if she merely hears your name, loses her head. And if she
sees you, if she sees you even one single time, she’ll end up in the insane
asylum.”
Sarratore gasped. “Antonio, my boy, I never had any intention of doing harm
to your mother. You justly recall how much I did for you. And in fact I have
always and only wanted to help her and all of you.”
“Then if you wish to continue to help her don’t look for her, don’t send her
books, don’t show up in the neighborhood.”
“This you cannot ask of me, you cannot keep me from seeing again the
places that are dear to me,” Sarratore said, in a warm, falsely emotional voice.
That tone made me indignant. I knew it, he had used it often at Barano, on
the beach at the Maronti. It was rich, caressing, the tone that he imagined a
man of depth who wrote poems and articles in Roma should have. I was on the
point of intervening, but Antonio, to my surprise, was ahead of me. He curved
his shoulders, drew in his head, and extended one hand toward the chest of
Donato Sarratore, pressing it with his powerful fingers. He said in dialect, “I
won’t hinder you. But I promise you that if you take away from my mother the
little reason that she still has, you will lose forever the desire to see these
shitty places again.”
Sarratore turned very pale.
“Yes,” he said quickly. “I understand, thank you.”
He turned on his heels and hurried off toward the station.
I slipped in under Antonio’s arm, proud of that burst of anger, but I realized
that he was trembling. I thought, perhaps for the first time, of what the death
of  his  father  must  have  been  for  him,  as  a  boy,  and  then  the  job,  the
responsibility that had fallen on him, the collapse of his mother. I drew him
away, full of affection, and gave myself another deadline: I’ll leave him after
Lila’s wedding.
51.
The  neighborhood  remembered  that  wedding  for  a  long  time.  Its
preparations  were  tangled  up  with  the  slow,  elaborate,  rancorous  birth  of
Cerullo shoes: two undertakings that, for one reason or another, it seemed,
would never come to fruition.
The  wedding  put  a  strain  on  the  shoemaker’s  shop.  Fernando  and  Rino
labored not only on the new shoes, which for the moment brought in nothing,
but also on the thousand other little jobs that provided immediate income,
which  they  needed  urgently.  They  had  to  put  together  enough  money  to
provide Lila with a small dowry and to meet the expenses of the refreshments,
which they intended to take on, no matter what, in order not to seem like poor
relations. As a result, the Cerullo household was extremely tense for months:
Nunzia  embroidered  sheets  night  and  day,  and  Fernando  made  constant
scenes, pining for the happy days when, in the tiny shop where he was king, he
glued, sewed, and hammered in peace, with the tacks between his lips.
The only ones who seemed unruffled were the engaged couple. There were
just two small moments of friction between them. The first had to do with
their  future  home.  Stefano  wanted  to  buy  a  small  apartment  in  the  new
neighborhood, Lila would have preferred to live in the old buildings. They
argued. The apartment in the old neighborhood was larger but dark and had
no view, like all the apartments there. The apartment in the new neighborhood
was smaller but had an enormous bathtub, like the ones in the Palmolive ad, a
bidet, and a view of Vesuvius. It was useless to point out that, while Vesuvius
was a shifting and distant outline that faded into the cloudy sky, less than two
hundred  yards  away  ran  the  gleaming  tracks  of  the  railroad.  Stefano  was
seduced by the new, by the shiny floors, by the white walls, and Lila soon gave
in. What counted more than anything else was that, not yet seventeen, she
would be the mistress of a house of her own, with hot water that came from
the taps, and a house not rented but owned.
The second cause of friction was the honeymoon. Stefano proposed Venice,
and Lila, revealing a tendency that would mark her whole life, insisted on not
going far from Naples. She suggested a stay on Ischia, Capri, and maybe the
Amalfi  coast,  all  places  she  had  never  been.  Her  future  husband  almost
immediately agreed.
Otherwise,  there  were  small  tensions,  more  than  anything  echoes  of
problems within their families. For example, if Stefano went into the Cerullo
shoe shop, he always let slip a few rude words about Fernando and Rino when
he saw Lila later, and she was upset, she leaped to their defense. He shook his
head, unpersuaded, he was beginning to see in the business of the shoes an
excessive investment, and at the end of the summer, when the strain between
him and the two Cerullos increased, he imposed a precise limit on the making
and unmaking by father, son, helpers. He said that by November he wanted the
first  results:  at  least  the  winter  styles,  men’s  and  women’s,  ready  to  be
displayed in the window for Christmas. Then, rather nervously, he admitted to
Lila that Rino was quicker to ask for money than to work. She defended her
brother, he replied, she bristled, he immediately retreated. He went to get the
pair of shoes that had given birth to the whole project, shoes bought and never
worn, kept as a valuable witness to their story, and he fingered them, smelled
them, became emotional talking of how he felt about them, saw them, had
always seen in them her small, almost childish hands working alongside her
brother’s large ones. They were on the terrace of the old house, the one where
we  had  set  off  the  fireworks  in  competition  with  the  Solaras.  He  took  her
fingers and kissed them, one by one, saying that he would never again allow
them to be spoiled.
Lila herself told me, happily, about that act of love. She told me the day she
took me to see the new house. What splendor: floors of polished majolica tile,
the tub in which you could have a bubble bath, the inlaid furniture in the
dining room and the bedroom, a refrigerator and even a telephone. I wrote
down the number, with great excitement. We had been born and lived in small
houses, without our own rooms, without a place to study. I still lived like that,
soon she would not. We went out on the balcony that overlooked the railroad
and  Vesuvius,  and  I  asked  her  warily:  “Do  you  and  Stefano  come  here  by
yourselves?”
“Yes, sometimes.”
“And what happens?”
She looked at me as if she didn’t understand.
“In what sense?”
I was embarrassed.
“Do you kiss?”
“Sometimes.”
“And then?”
“That’s all, we’re not married yet.”
I was confused. Was it possible? So much freedom and nothing? So much
gossip in the neighborhood, the Solaras’ obscenities, and there had been only a
few kisses?
“But he doesn’t ask you?”
“Why, does Antonio ask you?”
“Yes.”
“No, he doesn’t. He agrees that we should be married first.”
But  she  seemed  struck  by  my  questions,  much  as  I  was  struck  by  her
answers. So she yielded nothing to Stefano, even if they went out in the car by
themselves, even if they were about to get married, even if they already had a
furnished house, a bed with a mattress, still in its packing. And I, who certainly
would not get married, had long ago gone beyond kissing. When she asked me,
genuinely curious, if I gave Antonio the things he asked for, I was ashamed to
tell her the truth. I said no and she seemed content.
52.
I made the dates at the ponds less frequent, partly because school was about
to start again. I was sure that Lila, because of my classes, my homework, would
keep  me  out  of  the  wedding  preparations,  she  had  got  used  to  my
disappearance during the school year. But it wasn’t to be. The conflicts with
Pinuccia had intensified over the summer. It was no longer a matter of dresses
or hats or scarves or jewelry. One day Pinuccia said to her brother, in Lila’s
presence and unambiguously, that either his betrothed came to work in the
grocery, if not immediately then at least after the honeymoon—to work as the
whole family always had, as even Alfonso did whenever school allowed him to
—or she would stop working. And this time her mother supported her outright.
Lila didn’t blink, she said she would start immediately, even tomorrow, in
whatever  role  the  Carracci  family  wanted.  That  answer,  as  Lila’s  answers
always  were,  always  had  been,  though  intended  to  be  conciliatory,  had
something arrogant, scornful, about it, which made Pinuccia even angrier. It
became clear that the two women saw the shoemaker’s daughter as a witch
who had come to be the mistress, to throw money out the window without
lifting a finger to earn it, to subdue the master by her arts, making him act
unjustly against his own flesh and blood, that is to say against his sister and
even his mother.
Stefano, as usual, did not respond immediately. He waited until his sister’s
outburst was over, then, as if the problem of Lila and her placement in the
small family business had never been raised, said calmly that it would be better
if Pinuccia, rather than work in the grocery, would help his fiancée with the
preparations for the wedding.
“You don’t need me anymore?” she snapped.
“No: starting tomorrow I have Ada, Melina’s daughter, coming to replace
you.”
“Did she suggest it?” cried his sister, pointing to Lila.
“It’s none of your business.”
“Did  you  hear  that,  Ma?  Did  you  hear  what  he  said?  He  thinks  he’s  the
absolute boss in here.”
There was an unbearable silence, then Maria got up from the seat behind the
cash register and said to her son, “Find someone for this place, too, because I’m
tired and I don’t want to work anymore.”
Stefano  at  that  point  yielded  a  little.  “Calm  down,  I’m  not  the  boss  of
anything, the business of the grocery doesn’t have to do with me alone but all
of us. We have to make a decision. Pinù, do you need to work? No. Mammà, do
you need to sit back there all day? No. Then let’s give work to those who need
it.  I’ll  put  Ada  behind  the  counter  and  I’ll  think  about  the  cash  register.
Otherwise, who will take care of the wedding?”
I don’t know for sure if Lila was behind the expulsion of Pinuccia and her
mother  from  the  daily  running  of  the  grocery,  behind  the  hiring  of  Ada
(certainly Ada was convinced of it and so, especially, was Antonio, who began
referring to our friend as a good fairy). Of course, she wasn’t pleased that her
sister-in-law  and  mother-in-law  had  a  lot  of  free  time  to  devote  to  her
wedding. The two women complicated life, there were conflicts about every
little thing: the guests, the decoration of the church, the photographer, the
cake, the wedding favors, the rings, even the honeymoon, since Pinuccia and
Maria considered it a poor thing to go to Sorrento, Positano, Ischia, and Capri.
So all of a sudden I was drawn in, apparently to give Lila an opinion on this or
that, in reality to support her in a difficult battle.
I was starting my third year of high school, I had a lot of new, hard subjects.
My usual stubborn diligence was already killing me, I studied relentlessly. But
once, coming home from school, I ran into Lila and she said to me, point-blank,
“Please, Lenù, tomorrow will you come and give me some advice?”
I didn’t even know what she meant. I had been tested in chemistry and
hadn’t done well, and was suffering.
“Advice about what?”
“Advice about my wedding dress. Please, don’t say no, because if you don’t
come I’ll murder my sister-in-law and mother-in-law.”
I  went.  I  joined  her,  Pinuccia,  and  Maria  uneasily.  The  shop  was  on  the
Rettifilo and I remember I had stuck some books in a bag, hoping to find some
way of studying. It was impossible. From four in the afternoon to seven in the
evening we looked at styles, we fingered fabrics, Lila tried on the wedding
dresses displayed on the shop mannequins. Whatever she put on, her beauty
enhanced the dress, the dress enhanced her beauty. Stiff organza, soft satin,
airy tulle became her. A lace bodice, puff sleeves became her. A full skirt and a
narrow skirt became her, a long train and a short one, a flowing veil and a
short one,  a crown  of rhinestones,  of pearls,  of orange  blossoms. And  she,
obediently, examined styles or tried on the models that were flattering on the
mannequins. But occasionally, when she could no longer bear the fussiness of
her future relatives, the old Lila rose up and, looking me straight in the eye,
said,  alarming  mother-in-law,  sister-in-law,  “What  if  we  chose  a  beautiful
green satin, or a red organza, or a nice black tulle, or, better still, yellow?” It
took my laughter to indicate that the bride was joking, to return to serious,
rancorous  consideration  of  fabrics  and  styles.  The  dressmaker  merely  kept
repeating  enthusiastically,  “Please,  whatever  you  choose,  bring  me  the
wedding pictures so that I can display them in the shop window, and say: I
dressed that girl.”
The problem, however, was choosing. Every time Lila preferred a style, a
fabric, Pinuccia and Maria lined up in favor of another style, another fabric. I
said nothing, stunned by all those discussions and by the smell of new fabric.
Finally Lila asked me in vexation:
“What do you think, Lenù?”
There was silence. I suddenly perceived, with a certain astonishment, that
the two women had been expecting that moment and feared it. I set in motion
a technique I had learned at school, which consisted of this: whenever I didn’t
know how to answer a question, I was lavish in setting out premises in the
confident voice of someone who knows clearly where he wishes to end up. I
said first—in Italian—that I liked very much the styles favored by Pinuccia and
her mother. I launched not into praise but into arguments that demonstrated
how suitable they were to Lila’s figure. At the moment when, as in class with
the teachers, I felt I had the admiration, the sympathy of mother and daughter,
I chose one of the styles at random, truly at random, careful not to pick one of
those that Lila favored, and went on to demonstrate that it incorporated the
qualities of the styles favored by the two women, and the qualities of the ones
favored by my friend. The dressmaker, Pinuccia, the mother were immediately
in agreement with me. Lila merely looked at me with narrowed eyes. Then her
gaze returned to normal and she said that she agreed, too.
On the way out both Pinuccia and Maria were in a very good mood. They
addressed Lila almost with affection and, commenting on the purchase, kept
dragging me in with phrases like: as Lenuccia said, or, Lenuccia rightly said.
Lila maneuvered so that we were a little behind them, in the evening crowd of
the Rettifilo. She asked me:
“You learn this in school?”
“What?”
“To use words to con people.”
I felt wounded. I murmured, “You don’t like the style we chose?”
“I like it immensely.”
“So?”
“So do me the favor of coming with us whenever I ask you.”
I was angry. I said, “You want to use me to con them?”
She understood that she had offended me, she squeezed my hand hard. “I
didn’t  intend  to  say  something  unkind.  I  meant  only  that  you  are  good  at
making yourself liked. The difference between you and me, always, has been
that people are afraid of me and not of you.”
“Maybe because you’re mean,” I said, even angrier.
“Maybe,” she said, and I saw that I had hurt her as she had hurt me. Then,
repenting, I added immediately, to make up: “Antonio would get himself killed
for you: he said to thank you for giving his sister a job.”
“It’s Stefano who gave the job to Ada,” she replied. “I’m mean.”
53.
From then on, I was constantly called on to take part in the most disputed
decisions, and sometimes—I discovered—not at Lila’s request but Pinuccia and
her mother’s. I chose the favors. I chose the restaurant, in Via Orazio. I chose
the  photographer,  persuading  them  to  include  a  film  in  super  8.  In  every
circumstance I realized that, while I was deeply interested in everything, as if
each of those questions were practice for when my turn came to get married,
Lila, at the stations of her wedding, paid little attention. I was surprised, but
that was certainly the case. What truly engaged her was to make sure, once
and for all, that in her future life as wife and mother, in her house, her sister-
in-law and her mother-in-law would have no say. But it wasn’t the ordinary
conflict  between  mother-in-law,  daughter-in-law,  sister-in-law.  I  had  the
impression, from the way she used me, from the way she handled Stefano, that
she was struggling to find, from inside the cage in which she was enclosed, a
way of being, all her own, that was still obscure to her.
Naturally  I  wasted  entire  afternoons  settling  their  affairs,  I  didn’t  study
much, and a couple of times ended up not even going to school. The result was
that my report card for the first trimester was not especially brilliant. My new
teacher of Latin and Greek, the greatly respected Galiani, had a high opinion of
me, but in philosophy, chemistry, and mathematics I barely passed. Then one
morning I got into serious trouble. Since the religion teacher was constantly
delivering  tirades  against  the  Communists,  against  their  atheism,  I  felt
impelled to react, I don’t really know if by my affection for Pasquale, who had
always said he was a Communist, or simply because I felt that all the bad things
the priest said about Communists concerned me directly as the pet of the most
prominent Communist, Professor Galiani. The fact remains that I, who had
successfully completed a theological correspondence course, raised my hand
and said that the human condition was so obviously exposed to the blind fury
of chance that to trust in a God, a Jesus, the Holy Spirit—this last a completely
superfluous entity, it was there only to make up a trinity, notoriously nobler
than the mere binomial father-son—was the same thing as collecting trading
cards while the city burns in the fires of hell. Alfonso had immediately realized
that  I  was  overdoing  it  and  timidly  tugged  on  my  smock,  but  I  paid  no
attention and went all the way, to that concluding comparison. For the first
time I was sent out of the classroom and had a demerit on my class record.
Once I was in the hall, I was disoriented at first—what had happened, why
had I behaved so recklessly, where had I gotten the absolute conviction that
the things I was saying were right and should be said?—and then I remembered
that I had had those conversations with Lila, and saw that I had landed myself
in  trouble  because,  in  spite  of  everything,  I  continued  to  assign  her  an
authority that made me bold enough to challenge the religion teacher. Lila no
longer opened a book, no longer went to school, was about to become the wife
of a grocer, would probably end up at the cash register in place of Stefano’s
mother,  and  I?  I  had  drawn  from  her  the  energy  to  invent  an  image  that
defined religion as the collecting of trading cards while the city burns in the
fires of hell? Was it not true, then, that school was my personal wealth, now far
from her influence? I wept silently outside the classroom door.
But things changed unexpectedly. Nino Sarratore appeared at the end of the
hall. After the new encounter with his father, I had all the more reason to
behave as if he didn’t exist, but seeing him in that situation revived me, I
quickly dried my tears. He must have realized that something was wrong, and
he came toward me. He was more grown-up: he had a prominent Adam’s apple,
features hollowed out by a bluish beard, a firmer gaze. It was impossible to
avoid him. I couldn’t go back into the class, I couldn’t go to the bathroom,
either of which would have made my situation more complicated if the religion
teacher looked out. So when he joined me and asked why I was outside, what
had  happened,  I  told  him.  He  frowned  and  said,  “I’ll  be  right  back.”  He
disappeared and reappeared a few minutes later with Professor Galiani.
Galiani was full of praise. “But now,” she said, as if she were giving me and
Nino a lesson, “after the full attack, it’s time to mediate.” She knocked on the
door of the classroom, closed it behind her, and five minutes later looked out
happily.  I  could  go  back  provided  I  apologized  to  the  professor  for  the
aggressive  tone  I  had  used.  I  apologized,  wavering  between  anxiety  about
probable reprisals and pride in the support I had received from Nino and from
Professor Galiani.
I  was  careful  not  to  say  anything  to  my  parents,  but  I  told  Antonio
everything, and he proudly reported the incident to Pasquale, who ran into
Lila one morning and, so overcome by his love for her that he could barely
speak, seized on my adventure like a life vest, and told her about it. Thus I
became, in the blink of an eye, the heroine both of my old friends and of the
small but seasoned group of teachers and students who challenged the lectures
of the teacher of religion. Meanwhile, aware that my apologies to the priest
were not enough, I made an effort to regain credit with him and with his like-
minded colleagues. I easily separated my words from myself: toward all the
teachers who had become hostile to me I was respectful, helpful, cooperative,
so that they went back to thinking of me as a person who came out with odd,
but  forgivable,  assertions.  I  thus  discovered  that  I  was  able  to  behave  like
Professor Galiani: present my opinions firmly and, at the same time, soften
them, and regain respect, through my irreproachable behavior. Within a few
days it seemed to me that I had returned, along with Nino Sarratore, who was
in his fifth year and would graduate, to the top of the list of the most promising
students in our shabby high school.
It didn’t end there. A few weeks later, unexpectedly, Nino, with his shadowy
look, asked me if I could quickly write half a page recounting the conflict with
the priest.
“To do what with?”
He told me that he wrote for a little journal called Naples, Home of the Poor. He
had described the incident to the editors and they had said that if I could write
an account in time they would try to put it in the next issue. He showed me the
journal. It was a pamphlet of fifty pages, of a dirty gray. In the contents he
appeared, first name and last name, with an article entitled “The Numbers of
Poverty.” I thought of his father, and the satisfaction, the vanity with which he
had read to me at the Maronti the article he’d published in Roma.
“Do you also write poetry?” I asked.
He denied it with such disgusted energy that I immediately promised: “All
right, I’ll try.”
I went home in great agitation. My head was already churning with the
sentences I would write, and on the way I talked about it in great detail to
Alfonso. He became anxious for me, he begged me not to write anything.
“Will they sign it with your name?”
“Yes.”
“Lenù, the priest will get angry again and fail you: he’ll get chemistry and
mathematics on his side.”
He transmitted his anxiety to me and I lost confidence. But, as soon as we
separated, the idea of being able to show the journal, with my little article, my
name in print, to Lila, to my parents, to Maestra Oliviero, to Maestro Ferraro,
got the upper hand. I would mend things later. It had been very energizing to
win  praise  from  those  who  seemed  to  me  better  (Professor  Galiani,  Nino)
taking sides against those who seemed to me worse (the priest, the chemistry
teacher, the mathematics teacher), and yet to behave toward the adversaries in
such a way as not to lose their friendship and respect. I would make an effort
to repeat this when the article was published.
I  spent  the  afternoon  writing  and  rewriting.  I  found  concise,  dense
sentences.  I  tried  to  give  my  position  the  maximum  theoretical  weight  by
finding difficult words. I wrote, “If God is present everywhere, what need does
he have to disseminate himself by way of the Holy Spirit?” But the half page
was soon used up, merely in the premise. And the rest? I started again. And
since I had been trained since elementary school to try and stubbornly keep
trying, in the end I got a creditable result and turned to my lessons for the next
day.
But half an hour later my doubts returned, I felt the need for confirmation.
Who  could  I  ask  to  read  my  text  and  give  an  opinion?  My  mother?  My
brothers? Antonio? Naturally not, the only one was Lila. But to turn to her
meant to continue to recognize in her an authority, when in fact I, by now,
knew more than she did. So I resisted. I was afraid that she would dismiss my
half page with a disparaging remark. I was even more afraid that that remark
would nevertheless work in my mind, pushing me to extreme thoughts that I
would end up transcribing onto my half page, throwing off its equilibrium. And
yet finally I gave in and went to look for her. She was at her parents’ house. I
told her about Nino’s proposal and gave her the notebook.
She  looked  at  the  page  unwillingly,  as  if  the  writing  wounded  her  eyes.
Exactly like Alfonso, she asked, “Will they put your name on it?”
I nodded yes.
“Elena Greco?”
“Yes.”
She held out the notebook: “I’m not capable of telling you if it’s good or not.”
“Please.”
“No, I’m not capable.”
I had to insist. I said, though I knew it wasn’t true, that if she didn’t like it, if
in fact she refused to read it, I wouldn’t give it to Nino to print.
In the end she read it. It seemed to me that she shrank, as if I had unloaded a
weight on her. And I had the impression that she was making a painful effort to
free from some corner of herself the old Lila, the one who read, wrote, drew,
made plans spontaneously—the naturalness of an instinctive reaction. When
she succeeded, everything seemed pleasantly light.
“Can I erase?”
“Yes.”
She erased quite a few words and an entire sentence.
“Can I move something?”
“Yes.”
She circled a sentence and moved it with a wavy line to the top of the page.
“Can I recopy it for you onto another page?”
“I’ll do it.”
“No, let me do it.”
It took a while to recopy. When she gave me back the notebook, she said,
“You’re very clever, of course they always give you ten.”
I felt that there was no irony, it was a real compliment. Then she added with
sudden harshness:
“I don’t want to read anything else that you write.”
“Why?”
She thought about it.
“Because it hurts me,” and she struck her forehead with her hand and burst
out laughing.
54.
I went home happy. I shut myself in the toilet so that I wouldn’t disturb the
rest of the family and studied until three in the morning, when finally I went to
sleep. I dragged myself up at six-thirty to recopy the text. But first I read it
over in Lila’s beautiful round handwriting, a handwriting that had remained
the same as in elementary school, very different now from mine, which had
become smaller and plainer. On the page was exactly what I had written, but it
was  clearer,  more  immediate.  The  erasures,  the  transpositions,  the  small
additions, and, in some way, her handwriting itself gave me the impression
that I had escaped from myself and now was running a hundred paces ahead
with an energy and also a harmony that the person left behind didn’t know she
had.
I decided to leave the text in Lila’s handwriting. I brought it to Nino like that
in order to keep the visible trace of her presence in my words. He read it,
blinking  his  long  eyelashes.  At  the  end  he  said,  with  sudden,  unexpected
sadness, “Professor Galiani is right.”
“About what?”
“You write better than I do.”
And although I protested, embarrassed, he repeated that phrase again, then
turned his back and went off without saying goodbye. He didn’t even say when
the journal would come out or how I could get a copy, nor did I have the
courage to ask him. That behavior bothered me. And even more because, as he
walked away, I recognized for a few moments his father’s gait.
This was how our new encounter ended. We got everything wrong again. For
days Nino continued to behave as if writing better than him was a sin that had
to be expiated. I became irritated. When suddenly he reassigned me body, life,
presence, and asked me to walk a little way with him, I answered coldly that I
was busy, my boyfriend was supposed to pick me up.
For a while he must have thought that the boyfriend was Alfonso, but any
doubt was resolved when, one day, after school, his sister Marisa appeared, to
tell him something or other. We hadn’t seen each other since the days on
Ischia. She ran over to me, she greeted me warmly, she said how sorry she was
that  I  hadn’t  returned  to  Barano  that  summer.  Since  I  was  with  Alfonso  I
introduced him. She insisted, as her brother had already left, on going part of
the way with us. First she told us all her sufferings in love. Then, when she
realized  that  Alfonso  and  I  were  not  boyfriend  and  girlfriend,  she  stopped
talking to me and began to chat with him in her charming way. She must have
told her brother that between Alfonso and me there was nothing, because right
away, the next day, he began hovering around me again. But now the mere
sight of him made me nervous. Was he vain like his father, even if he detested
him? Did he think that others couldn’t help liking him, loving him? Was he so
full of himself that he couldn’t tolerate good qualities other than his own?
I asked Antonio to come and pick me up at school. He obeyed immediately,
confused and at the same time pleased by that request. What surely surprised
him most was that there in public, in front of everyone, I took his hand and
entwined my fingers with his. I had always refused to walk like that, either in
the neighborhood or outside it, because it made me feel that I was still a child,
going  for  a  walk  with  my  father.  That  day  I  did  it.  I  knew  that  Nino  was
watching us and I wanted him to understand who I was. I wrote better than he
did, I would publish in the magazine where he published, I was as good at
school and better than he was, I had a man, look at him: and so I would not run
after him like a faithful beast.
55.
I also asked Antonio to go with me to Lila’s wedding, not to leave me alone,
and maybe always to dance with me. I dreaded that day, I felt it as a definitive
break, and I wanted someone there who would support me.
This  request  was  to  complicate  life  further.  Lila  had  sent  invitations  to
everyone. In the houses of the neighborhood the mothers, the grandmothers
had been working for months to make dresses, to get hats and purses, to shop
for a wedding present, I don’t know, a set of glasses, of plates, of silverware. It
wasn’t so much for Lila that they made that effort; it was for Stefano, who was
very decent, and allowed you to pay at the end of the month. But a wedding
was,  above  all,  an  occasion  where  no  one  should  make  a  bad  showing,
especially girls without fiancés, who there would have a chance of finding one
and getting settled, marrying, in their turn, within a few years.
It was really for that last reason that I wanted Antonio to go with me. I had
no  intention  of  making  the  thing  official—we  were  careful  to  keep  our
relationship absolutely hidden—but I wished to keep under control my anxiety
about being attractive. I wanted, that day, to feel calm, tranquil, despite my
glasses, the modest dress made by my mother, my old shoes, and at the same
time think: I have everything a sixteen-year-old girl should have, I don’t need
anything or anyone.
But Antonio didn’t take it like that. He loved me, he considered me the
luckiest thing that had ever happened to him. He often asked aloud, with a hint
of anguish straining under an appearance of amusement, how in the world I
had chosen him, who was stupid and couldn’t put two words together. In fact,
he couldn’t wait to appear at my parents’ house and make our relationship
official. And so at that request of mine he must have thought that I had finally
decided to let him come out of hiding, and he went into debt to buy a suit, in
addition to what he was spending for the wedding gift, clothes for Ada and the
other children, a presentable appearance for Melina.
I  didn’t  notice  anything.  I  struggled  on,  between  school,  the  urgent
consultations whenever things got tangled up between Lila and her sister-in-
law and mother-in-law, the pleasant nervousness about the article that I might
see published at any time. I was secretly convinced that I would truly exist only
at the moment when my signature, Elena Greco, appeared in print, and as I
waited for that day I didn’t pay much attention to Antonio, who had got the
idea of completing his wedding outfit with a pair of Cerullo shoes. Every so
often he asked me, “Do you know what point they’ve reached?” I answered,
“Ask Rino, Lila doesn’t know anything.”
It was true. In November the Cerullos summoned Stefano without bothering
to show the shoes to Lila first, even though she was still living at home with
them.  Instead,  Stefano  showed  up  for  the  occasion  with  his  fiancée  and
Pinuccia, all three looking as if they had emerged from the television screen.
Lila told me that, on seeing the shoes she had designed years earlier made real,
she had felt a very violent emotion, as if a fairy had appeared and fulfilled a
wish.  The  shoes  really  were  as  she  had  imagined  them  at  the  time.  Even
Pinuccia  was  amazed.  She  wanted  to  try  on  a  pair  she  liked  and  she
complimented Rino effusively, letting him understand that she considered him
the  true  craftsman  of  those  masterpieces  of  sturdy  lightness,  of  dissonant
harmony. The only one who seemed displeased was Stefano. He interrupted
the warm greetings Lila was giving her father and brother and the workers,
silenced the sugary voice of Pinuccia, who was congratulating Rino, raising an
ankle  to  show  him  her  extraordinarily  shod  foot,  and,  style  after  style,  he
criticized the modifications made to the original designs. He was especially
persistent in the comparison between the man’s shoe as it had been made by
Rino and Lila in secret from Fernando, and the same shoe as the father and son
had refined it. “What’s this fringe, what are these stitches, what is this gilded
pin?” he asked in annoyance. And no matter how Fernando explained all the
modifications, for reasons of durability or to disguise some defect in the idea,
Stefano  was  adamant.  He  said  he  had  invested  too  much  money  to  obtain
ordinary shoes and not—precisely identical—Lila’s shoes.
The tension was extreme. Lila gently defended her father, she told her fiancé
to  let  it  go:  her  designs  were  the  fantasies  of  a  child,  and  surely  the
modifications  were  necessary,  and,  besides,  were  not  so  great.  But  Rino
supported Stefano and the discussion went on for a long time. It broke off only
when Fernando, utterly worn out, sat down in a corner and, looking at the
pictures on the wall, said, “If you want the shoes for Christmas take them like
that.  If  you  want  them  exactly  the  way  my  daughter  designed  them,  have
someone else make them.”
Stefano gave in, Rino, too, gave in.
At Christmas the shoes appeared in the window, a window with the comet
star made of cotton wool. I went by to see them: they were elegant objects,
carefully finished: just to look at them gave an impression of wealth that did
not accord with the humble shop window, with the desolate landscape outside,
with the shop’s interior, all pieces of hide and leather and benches and awls
and  wooden  forms  and  boxes  of  shoes  piled  up  to  the  ceiling,  waiting  for
customers. Even with Fernando’s modifications, they were the shoes of our
childish dreams, not invented for the reality of the neighborhood.
In fact at Christmas not a single pair sold. Only Antonio appeared, asked
Rino for a 44, tried it. Later he told me the pleasure he had had in feeling so
well shod, imagining himself with me at the wedding, in his new suit, with
those shoes on his feet. But when he asked the price and Rino told him, he was
dumbstruck: “Are you crazy?” and when Rino said, “I’ll sell them to you on a
monthly installment,” he responded, laughing, “Then I’ll buy a Lambretta.”
56.
At the moment Lila, taken up by the wedding, didn’t realize that her brother,
until  then  cheerful,  playful,  even  though  he  was  exhausted  by  work,  was
becoming depressed again, sleeping badly, flying into a rage for no reason.
“He’s  like  a  child,”  she  said  to  Pinuccia,  as  if  to  apologize  for  some  of  his
outbursts, “his mood changes according to whether his whims are satisfied
immediately or not, he doesn’t know how to wait.” She, like Fernando, did not
feel in the least that the failure of the shoes to sell at Christmas was a fiasco.
After all, the production of the shoes had not followed any plan: they had
originated in Stefano’s wish to see Lila’s purest caprice made concrete, there
were heavy ones, light ones, spanning most of the seasons. And this was an
advantage. In the white boxes piled up in the Cerullos’ shop was a considerable
assortment. They had only to wait, and in winter, in spring, in autumn the
shoes would sell.
But Rino was increasingly agitated. After Christmas, on his own initiative, he
went to the owner of the dusty shoe store at the end of the stradone and,
although he knew the man was bound hand and foot to the Solaras, proposed
that he display some of the Cerullo shoes, without obligation, just to see how
they went. The man said no politely, that product was not suitable for his
customers. Rino took offense and an exchange of vulgarities followed, which
became known in the whole neighborhood. Fernando was furious with his son,
Rino insulted him, and Lila again experienced her brother as an element of
disorder, a manifestation of the destructive forces that had frightened her.
When  the  four  of  them  went  out,  she  noticed  with  apprehension  that  her
brother  maneuvered  to  let  her  and  Pinuccia  go  on  ahead  while  he  stayed
behind  to  talk  to  Stefano.  In  general  the  grocer  listened  to  him  without
showing signs of irritation. Only once Lila heard him say:
“Excuse me, Rino, do you think I put so much money in the shoe store like
that, without any security, just for love of your sister? We have the shoes,
they’re beautiful, we have to sell them. The problem is to find the right place.”
That “just for love of your sister” didn’t please her. But she let it go, because
the words had a good effect on Rino, who calmed down and began to talk, in
particular to Pinuccia, about strategies for selling the shoes. He said they had
to think on a grand scale. Why did so many good initiatives fail? Why had the
Gorresio auto repair shop given up motorbikes? Why had the dressmaker in
the dry goods store lasted only six months? Because they were undertakings
that lacked breadth. The Cerullo shoes, instead, would as soon as possible leave
the local market and become popular in the wealthier neighborhoods.
Meanwhile the date of the wedding approached. Lila hurried to fittings for
her wedding dress, gave the final touches to her future home, fought with
Pinuccia  and  Maria,  who,  among  many  things,  were  intolerant  of  Nunzia’s
intrusions.  The  situation  was  increasingly  tense.  But  the  damaging  attacks
came from elsewhere. There were two events in particular, one after the other,
that wounded Lila deeply.
One cold afternoon in February she asked me out of the blue if I could come
with her to see Maestra Oliviero. She had never displayed any interest in her,
no affection, no gratitude. Now, though, she felt the need to bring her the
invitation in person. Since in the past I had never reported to her the hostile
tones that the teacher had often used about her, it didn’t seem to me right to
tell her then, especially since the teacher had recently seemed less aggressive,
more melancholy: maybe she would welcome her kindly.
Lila dressed with extreme care. We walked to the building where the teacher
lived, near the parish church. As we climbed the stairs, I realized that she was
nervous. I was used to that journey, to those stairs; she wasn’t, and didn’t say a
word. I rang the bell, I heard the teacher’s dragging steps.
“Who is it?”
“Greco.”
She opened the door. Over her shoulders she wore a purple shawl and half
her  face  was  wrapped  in  a  scarf.  Lila  smiled  and  said,  “Maestra,  do  you
remember me?”
The  teacher  stared  at  her  as  she  used  to  do  in  school  when  Lila  was
annoying,  then  she  turned  to  me,  speaking  with  difficulty,  as  if  she  had
something in her mouth.
“Who is it? I don’t know her.”
Lila was confused and said quickly, in Italian, “I’m Cerullo. I’ve brought you
an invitation, I’m getting married. And I would be so happy if you would come
to my wedding.”
The teacher turned to me, said: “I know Cerullo, I don’t know who this girl
is.”
She closed the door in our faces.
We stood without moving on the landing for some moments, then I touched
her hand to comfort her. She withdrew it, stuck the invitation under the door,
and  started  down  the  stairs.  On  the  street  she  began  talking  about  all  the
bureaucratic problems at the city hall and the parish, and how helpful my
father had been.
The other sorrow, perhaps more profound, came, surprisingly, from Stefano
and the business of the shoes. He had long since decided that the role of speech
master  would  be  entrusted  to  a  relative  of  Maria’s  who  had  emigrated  to
Florence after the war and had set up a small trade in old things of varied
provenance, especially metal objects. This relative had married a Florentine
woman and had taken on the local accent. Because of his cadences he enjoyed
in the family a certain prestige, and also for that reason had been Stefano’s
confirmation sponsor. But, abruptly, the bridegroom changed his mind.
At first, Lila spoke as if it were a sign of last-minute nervousness. For her, it
was completely indifferent who the speech master was, the important thing
was  to  decide.  But  for  several  days  Stefano  gave  her  only  vague,  confused
answers,  and  she  couldn’t  understand  who  was  to  replace  the  Florentine
couple. Then, less than a week before the wedding, the truth came out. Stefano
told her, as a thing done, without any explanation, that the speech master
would be Silvio Solara, the father of Marcello and Michele.
Lila, who until that moment hadn’t considered the possibility that even a
distant relative of Marcello Solara might be present at her wedding, became
again the girl I knew very well. She insulted Stefano grossly, she said she didn’t
want to ever see him again. She shut herself up in her parents’ house, stopped
concerning herself with anything, didn’t go to the last fitting of the dress, did
absolutely nothing that had to do with the imminent wedding.
The procession of relatives began. First came her mother, Nunzia, who spoke
to her desperately about the good of the family. Then Fernando arrived, gruff,
and told her not to be a child: for anyone who wanted to have a future in the
neighborhood, to have Silvio Solara as speech master was obligatory. Finally
Rino  came,  and,  in  an  aggressive  tone  of  voice,  and  with  the  air  of  a
businessman  who  is  interested  only  in  profit,  explained  to  her  how  things
stood: Solara the father was like a bank and, above all, was the channel by
which the Cerullo shoe styles could be placed in shops. “What are you doing?”
he shouted at her with puffy, bloodshot eyes. “You want to ruin me and the
whole family and all the work we’ve done up to now?” Right afterward even
Pinuccia appeared, and said to her, in a somewhat artificial tone of voice, how
pleased she, too, would have been to have the metal merchant from Florence
as the speech master, but you had to be reasonable, you couldn’t cancel a
wedding and eradicate a love for a matter of such little importance.
A day and a night passed. Nunzia sat mutely in a corner without moving,
without caring for the house, without sleeping. Then she slipped out in secret
from her daughter and came to summon me, to speak to Lila, to put in a word. I
was flattered, I thought for a long time which side to take. There was at stake a
wedding,  a  practical,  highly  complex  thing,  crammed  with  affections  and
interests. I was frightened. I knew that, although I could argue publicly with
the Holy Spirit, challenging the authority of the professor of religion, if I were
in Lila’s place I would never have the courage to throw it all away. But she, yes,
she  would  be  capable  of  it,  even  though  the  wedding  was  about  to  be
celebrated. What to do? I felt that it would take very little for me to urge her
along that path, and that to work for that conclusion would give me great
pleasure.  Inside,  it  was  what  I  truly  wanted:  to  bring  her  back  to  pale,
ponytailed Lila, with the narrowed eyes of a bird of prey, in her tattered dress.
No  more  of  those  airs,  that  acting  like  the  Jacqueline  Kennedy  of  the
neighborhood.
But,  unfortunately  for  her  and  for  me,  it  seemed  a  small-minded  act.
Thinking it would be for her good, I would not restore her to the bleakness of
the Cerullo house, and so a single idea became fixed in my mind and all I could
do was tell her over and over again, with gentle persuasion: Silvio Solara, Lila,
isn’t Marcello, or even Michele; it’s wrong to confuse them, you know better
than I do, you’ve said it yourself on other occasions. He’s not the one who
pulled Ada into the car, he’s not the one who shot at us the night of New
Year’s, he’s not the one who forced his way into your house, he’s not the one
who said vulgar things about you; Silvio will be the speech master and will help
Rino and Stefano sell the shoes, that’s all—he’ll have no importance in your
future life. I reshuffled the cards that by now we knew well enough. I spoke of
the before and the after, of the old generation and of ours, of how we were
different, of how she and Stefano were different. And this last argument made
a  breach,  seduced  her,  I  returned  to  it  passionately.  She  listened  to  me  in
silence, evidently she wanted to be helped to compose herself, and slowly she
did.  But  I  read  in  her  eyes  that  that  move  of  Stefano’s  had  shown  her
something about him that she still couldn’t see clearly and that just for that
reason frightened her even more than the ravings of Rino. She said to me:
“Maybe it’s not true that he loves me.”
“What do you mean he doesn’t love you? He does everything you tell him
to.”
“Only when I don’t put real money at risk,” she said in a tone of contempt
that I had never heard her use for Stefano Carracci.
In any case she returned to the world. She didn’t appear in the grocery, she
didn’t go to the new house, in other words she was not the one who would seek
to  reconcile.  She  waited  for  Stefano  to  say  to  her:  “Thank  you,  I  love  you
dearly, you know there are things one is obliged to do.” Only then did she let
him  come  up  behind  her  and  kiss  her  on  the  neck.  But  then  she  turned
suddenly and looking him straight in the eyes said to him, “Marcello Solara
must absolutely not set foot in my wedding.”
“How can I prevent it?”
“I don’t know, but you must swear to me.”
He snorted and said smiling, “All right, Lina, I swear.”
57.
March 12th arrived, a mild day that was almost like spring. Lila wanted me
to come early to her old house, so that I could help her wash, do her hair, dress.
She sent her mother away, we were alone. She sat on the edge of the bed in
underpants and bra. Next to her was the wedding dress, which looked like the
body of a dead woman; in front of us, on the hexagonal-tiled floor, was the
copper tub full of boiling water. She asked me abruptly: “Do you think I’m
making a mistake?”
“How?”
“By getting married.”
“Are you still thinking about the speech master?”
“No, I’m thinking of the teacher. Why didn’t she want me to come in?”
“Because she’s a mean old lady.”
She was silent for a while, staring at the water that sparkled in the tub, then
she said, “Whatever happens, you’ll go on studying.”
“Two more years: then I’ll get my diploma and I’m done.”
“No, don’t ever stop: I’ll give you the money, you should keep studying.”
I gave a nervous laugh, then said, “Thanks, but at a certain point school is
over.”
“Not for you: you’re my brilliant friend, you have to be the best of all, boys
and girls.”
She  got  up,  took  off  her  underpants  and  bra,  said,  “Come  on,  help  me,
otherwise I’ll be late.”
I had never seen her naked, I was embarrassed. Today I can say that it was
the  embarrassment  of  gazing  with  pleasure  at  her  body,  of  being  the  not
impartial witness of her sixteen-year-old’s beauty a few hours before Stefano
touched her, penetrated her, disfigured her, perhaps, by making her pregnant.
At the time it was just a tumultuous sensation of necessary awkwardness, a
state  in  which  you  cannot  avert  the  gaze  or  take  away  the  hand  without
recognizing your own turmoil, without, by that retreat, declaring it, hence
without coming into conflict with the undisturbed innocence of the one who is
the  cause  of  the  turmoil,  without  expressing  by  that  rejection  the  violent
emotion that overwhelms you, so that it forces you to stay, to rest your gaze on
the childish shoulders, on the breasts and stiffly cold nipples, on the narrow
hips and the tense buttocks, on the black sex, on the long legs, on the tender
knees, on the curved ankles, on the elegant feet; and to act as if it’s nothing,
when instead everything is there, present, in the poor dim room, amid the
worn furniture, on the uneven, water-stained floor, and your heart is agitated,
your veins inflamed.
I washed her with slow, careful gestures, first letting her squat in the tub,
then asking her to stand up: I still have in my ears the sound of the dripping
water, and the impression that the copper of the tub had a consistency not
different from Lila’s flesh, which was smooth, solid, calm. I had a confusion of
feelings and thoughts: embrace her, weep with her, kiss her, pull her hair,
laugh,  pretend  to  sexual  experience  and  instruct  her  in  a  learned  voice,
distancing her with words just at the moment of greatest closeness. But in the
end there was only the hostile thought that I was washing her, from her hair to
the soles of her feet, early in the morning, just so that Stefano could sully her
in the course of the night. I imagined her naked as she was at that moment,
entwined  with  her  husband,  in  the  bed  in  the  new  house,  while  the  train
clattered under their windows and his violent flesh entered her with a sharp
blow, like the cork pushed by the palm into the neck of a wine bottle. And it
suddenly seemed to me that the only remedy against the pain I was feeling,
that I would feel, was to find a corner secluded enough so that Antonio could
do to me, at the same time, the exact same thing.
I helped her dry off, dress, put on the wedding dress that I—I, I thought with
a mixture of pride and suffering—had chosen for her. The fabric became living,
over its whiteness ran Lila’s heat, the red of her mouth, her hard black eyes.
Finally she put on the shoes that she herself had designed. Pressed by Rino,
who if she hadn’t worn them would have felt a kind of betrayal, she had chosen
a pair with low  heels, to avoid  seeming too much  taller than Stefano.  She
looked at herself in the mirror, lifting the dress slightly.
“They’re ugly,” she said.
“It’s not true.”
She laughed nervously.
“But yes, look: the mind’s dreams have ended up under the feet.”
She turned with a sudden expression of fear.
“What’s going to happen to me, Lenù?”
58.
In the kitchen, waiting impatiently for us, were Fernando and Nunzia. I had
never seen them so well dressed and groomed. At that time Lila’s parents, mine
—all parents—seemed to me old. I didn’t make much of a distinction between
them and my grandparents, maternal and paternal, creatures who in my eyes
all led a sort of cold life, an existence that had nothing in common with mine,
with  Lila’s,  Stefano’s,  Antonio’s,  Pasquale’s.  It  was  we  who  were  truly
consumed by the heat of feelings, by the outburst of thoughts. Only now, as I
write, do I realize that Fernando at that time couldn’t have been more than
forty-five,  Nunzia  was  certainly  a  few  years  younger,  and  together,  that
morning, he, in a white shirt and dark suit, with his Randolph Scott face, and
she, all in blue, with a blue hat and blue veil, made an impressive sight. The
same goes for my parents, about whose age I can be more precise, my father
was thirty-nine, my mother thirty-five. I looked at them for a long time in the
church. I felt with vexation that, that day, my success in school consoled them
not at all, that in fact they felt, especially my mother, that it was pointless, a
waste of time. When Lila, splendid in the dazzling white cloud of her dress and
the gauzy veil, processed through the Church of the Holy Family on the arm of
the shoemaker and joined Stefano, who looked extremely handsome, at the
flower-decked altar—lucky the florist who had provided such abundance—my
mother, even if her wandering eye seemed to gaze elsewhere, looked at me to
make me regret that I was there, in my glasses, far from the center of the
scene, while my bad friend had acquired a wealthy husband, economic security
for her family, a house of her own, not rented but bought, with a bathtub, a
refrigerator, a television, and a telephone.
The ceremony was long, the priest drew it out for an eternity. Coming into
the church the relatives and friends of the bridegroom had all sat together on
one side, the relatives and friends of the bride on the other. Throughout the
ceremony the photographer kept shooting—flash, spotlights—while his young
assistant filmed the important moments.
Antonio sat devotedly next to me, in his new tailor-made suit, leaving to Ada
—who was really annoyed because, as the clerk in the bridegroom’s grocery
store, she might have aspired to a better place—the job of sitting at the back
next to Melina and keeping an eye on her, along with the younger children.
Once or twice he whispered something in my ear, but I didn’t answer. He was
supposed simply to sit next to me, without showing a particular intimacy, to
avoid gossip. I let my eyes wander through the crowded church, people were
bored and, like me, kept looking around. There was an intense fragrance of
flowers, a smell of new clothes. Gigliola looked pretty, and so did Carmela
Peluso. And the boys were their equal. Enzo and especially Pasquale seemed to
want to demonstrate that there, at the altar, next to Lila, they would have
made  a  better  showing  than  Stefano.  As  for  Rino,  while  the  construction
worker and the fruit and vegetable seller stood at the back of the church, like
sentinels  for  the  success  of  the  ceremony,  he,  the  brother  of  the  bride,
breaking the order of family ranks, had gone to sit next to Pinuccia, on the side
of the bridegroom’s relatives, and he, too, was perfect in his new suit, Cerullo
shoes on his feet, as shiny as his brilliantined hair. What a display! It was clear
that no one who had received an invitation wanted to miss it, and they came
dressed like grand ladies and gentlemen, something that, as far as I knew, as
far as everyone knew, meant that not a few—perhaps first of all Antonio, who
was sitting next to me—had had to borrow money. Then I looked at Silvio
Solara, a large man in a dark suit, standing next to the bridegroom, with a lot
of gold glittering on his wrists. I looked at his wife, Manuela, dressed in pink,
and loaded down with jewels, who stood beside the bride. The money for the
display came from them. With Don Achille dead, it was that man with his
purple complexion and blue eyes, bald at the temples, and that lean woman,
with a long nose and thin lips, who lent money to the whole neighborhood (or,
to be precise, Manuela managed the practical side: famous and feared was the
ledger book with the red cover in which she put down figures, due dates). Lila’s
wedding was an affair not only for the florist, not only for the photographer,
but, above all, for that couple, who had also provided the cake, and the favors.
Lila, I realized, never looked at them. She didn’t even turn toward Stefano,
she stared only at the priest. I thought that, seen like that, from behind, they
were not a handsome couple. Lila was taller, he shorter. Lila gave off an energy
that couldn’t be ignored, he seemed a faded little man. Lila seemed extremely
absorbed,  as  if  she  were  obliged  to  understand  fully  what  that  ritual  truly
signified, he instead turned every so often toward his mother or exchanged a
smile with Silvio Solara or scratched his head. At one point I was seized by
anxiety. I thought: and if Stefano really isn’t what he seems? But I didn’t follow
that thought to the end for two reasons. First of all, the bride and groom said
yes clearly, decisively, amid the general commotion: they exchanged rings,
they  kissed,  I  had  to  understand  that  Lila  was  really  married.  And  then
suddenly I stopped paying attention to the bride and groom. I realized that I
had seen everyone except Alfonso, I looked for him among the relatives of the
bridegroom,  among  those  of  the  bride,  and  found  him  at  the  back  of  the
church, almost hidden by a pillar. But behind him appeared in full splendor
Marisa  Sarratore.  And  right  behind  her,  lanky,  disheveled,  hands  in  his
pockets, in the rumpled jacket and pants he wore to school, was Nino.
59.
There was a confused crowding around the newlyweds, who came out of the
church accompanied by the vibrant sounds of the organ, the flashes of the
photographer.  Lila  and  Stefano  stood  in  the  church  square  amid  kisses,
embraces, the chaos of the cars and the nervousness of the relatives who were
left  waiting,  while  others,  not  even  blood  relations—but  perhaps  more
important,  more  loved,  more  richly  dressed,  ladies  with  especially  elegant
hats?—were  loaded  immediately  into  cars  and  driven  to  Via  Orazio,  to  the
restaurant.
Alfonso was all dressed up. I had never seen him in a dark suit, white shirt,
tie.  Outside  of  his  modest  school  clothes,  outside  of  the  grocery  apron,  he
seemed to me not only older than his sixteen years but suddenly—I thought—
physically different from his brother Stefano. He was taller now, slender, and
was handsome, like a Spanish dancer I had seen on television, with large eyes,
full lips, still no trace of a beard. Marisa had evidently stuck with him, their
relationship had developed, they must have been seeing each other without
my  realizing  it.  Had  Alfonso,  however  devoted  to  me,  been  won  over  by
Marisa’s curls and her unstoppable chatter, which exempted him, who was so
shy, from filling the gaps in conversation? Were they together officially? I
doubted it, he would have told me. But things were clearly going well, since he
had invited her to his brother’s wedding. And she, surely in order to get her
parents’ permission, had dragged Nino along.
So there he was, in the church square, the young Sarratore, completely out
of  place  in  his  shabby  old  clothes,  too  tall,  too  thin,  hair  too  long  and
uncombed, hands sunk too deep in the pockets of his trousers, wearing the
expression of one who doesn’t know what to do with himself, his eyes on the
newlyweds  like  everyone  else’s,  but  without  interest,  only  to  rest  them
somewhere.  That  unexpected  presence  added  greatly  to  the  emotional
disorder of the day. We greeted each other in the church, a whisper and that
was  it,  hello,  hello.  Nino  had  followed  his  sister  and  Alfonso,  I  had  been
grabbed  firmly  by  the  arm  by  Antonio  and,  although  I  immediately  freed
myself, had still ended up in the company of Ada, Melina, Pasquale, Carmela,
Enzo. Now, in the uproar, while the newlyweds got into a big white car with
the photographer and his assistant, to go and have pictures taken at the Parco
della Rimembranza, I became anxious that Antonio’s mother would recognize
Nino,  that  she  would  read  in  his  face  some  feature  of  Donato’s.  It  was  a
needless worry. Lila’s mother, Nunzia, led that addled woman, along with Ada
and the smaller children, to a car and they drove away.
In fact no one recognized Nino, not even Gigliola, not even Carmela, not
even Enzo. Nor did they notice Marisa, although her features still resembled
those of the girl she had been. The two Sarratores, for the moment, passed
completely  unobserved.  And  meanwhile  Antonio  was  pushing  me  toward
Pasquale’s old car, and Carmela and Enzo got in with us, and we were about to
leave, and all I could say was, “Where are my parents? I hope someone is taking
care of them.” Enzo said that he had seen them in some car, and so there was
nothing to do, we left, and I barely had time to glance at Nino, standing in the
church square, in a daze, while Alfonso and Marisa were talking to each other.
Then I lost him.
I  became  nervous.  Antonio,  sensitive  to  my  every  change  of  mood,
whispered, “What is it?”
“Nothing.”
“Did something upset you?”
“No.”
Carmela laughed. “She’s annoyed that Lina is married and she’d like to get
married, too.”
“Why, wouldn’t you like to?” Enzo asked.
“If it were up to me, I’d get married tomorrow.”
“Who to?”
“I know who.”
“Shut up,” Pasquale said, “no one would have you.”
We went down toward the Marina, Pasquale was a ferocious driver. Antonio
had fixed up the car for him so that it drove like a race car. He sped along,
making a racket and ignoring the jolts caused by the bumpy streets. He would
speed toward the cars ahead of him as if he wanted to go through them, stop a
few inches before hitting them, turn the wheel abruptly, pass. We girls cried
out  in  terror  or  uttered  indignant  instructions  that  made  him  laugh  and
inspired him to do still worse. Antonio and Enzo didn’t blink, at most they
made vulgar comments about the slow drivers, lowered the windows, and, as
Pasquale sped past, shouted insults.
It was during that journey to Via Orazio that I began to be made unhappy by
my own alienness. I had grown up with those boys, I considered their behavior
normal, their violent language was mine. But for six years now I had also been
following daily a path that they were completely ignorant of and in the end I
had confronted it brilliantly. With them I couldn’t use any of what I learned
every day, I had to suppress myself, in some way diminish myself. What I was
in school I was there obliged to put aside or use treacherously, to intimidate
them. I asked myself what I was doing in that car. They were my friends, of
course, my boyfriend was there, we were going to Lila’s wedding celebration.
But that very celebration confirmed that Lila, the only person I still felt was
essential even though our lives had diverged, no longer belonged to us and,
without her, every intermediary between me and those youths, that car racing
through the streets, was gone. Why then wasn’t I with Alfonso, with whom I
shared both origin and flight? Why, above all, hadn’t I stopped to say to Nino,
Stay,  come  to  the  reception,  tell  me  when  the  magazine  with  my  article’s
coming  out,  let’s  talk,  let’s  dig  ourselves  a  cave  that  can  protect  us  from
Pasquale’s driving, from his vulgarity, from the violent tones of Carmela and
Enzo, and also—yes, also—of Antonio?
60.
We were the first young people to enter the reception room. My bad mood
got worse. Silvio and Manuela Solara were already at their table, along with the
metal merchant, his Florentine wife, Stefano’s mother. Lila’s parents were also
at a long table with other relatives, my parents, Melina, Ada, who was furious
and  greeted  Antonio  angrily.  The  band  was  taking  its  place,  the  musicians
tuning their instruments, the singer at the microphone. We wandered around
embarrassed. We didn’t know where to sit, none of us dared ask the waiters,
Antonio clung to me, trying to divert me.
My mother called me, I pretended not to hear. She called me again and I
didn’t answer. Then she got up, came over to me with her limping gait. She
wanted me to sit next to her. I refused. She whispered, “Why is Melina’s son
always around you?”
“No one is around me, Ma.”
“Do you think I’m an idiot?”
“No.”
“Come and sit next to me.”
“No.”
“I told you come. We’re not sending you to school to let you ruin yourself
with an auto mechanic who has a crazy mother.”
I did what she said; she was furious. Other young people began arriving, all
friends of Stefano. Among them I saw Gigliola, who nodded to me to join them.
My mother restrained me. Pasquale, Carmela, Enzo, Antonio finally sat down
with Gigliola’s group. Ada, who had succeeded in getting rid of her mother by
entrusting her to Nunzia, stopped to whisper in my ear, saying, “Come.” I tried
to get up but my mother grabbed my arm angrily. Ada made a face and went to
sit next to her brother, who every so often looked at me, while I signaled to
him, raising my eyes to the ceiling, that I was a prisoner.
The band began to play. The singer, who was around forty, and nearly bald,
with very delicate features, hummed something as a test. Other guests arrived,
the  room  grew  crowded.  None  of  the  guests  disguised  their  hunger,  but
naturally we had to wait for the newlyweds. I tried again to get up and my
mother whispered, “You are going to stay near me.”
Near her. I thought how contradictory she was, without realizing it, with her
rages, with those imperious gestures. She hadn’t wanted me to go to school,
but now that I was going to school she considered me better than the boys I
had grown up with, and she understood, as I myself now did, that my place was
not among them. Yet here she was insisting that I stay with her, to keep me
from who knows what stormy sea, from who knows what abyss or precipice, all
dangers that at that moment were represented in her eyes by Antonio. But
staying near her meant staying in her world, becoming completely like her.
And if I became like her, who would be right for me if not Antonio?
Meanwhile  the  newlyweds  entered,  to  enthusiastic  applause.  The  band
started immediately, with the marriage processional. I was indissolubly welded
to my mother, to her body, the alienness that was expanding inside me. Here
was  Lila  celebrated  by  the  neighborhood,  she  seemed  happy.  She  smiled,
elegant, courteous, her hand in her husband’s. She was very beautiful. As a
child I had looked to her, to her progress, to learn how to escape my mother. I
had been mistaken. Lila had remained there, chained in a glaring way to that
world, from which she imagined she had taken the best. And the best was that
young man, that marriage, that celebration, the game of shoes for Rino and her
father. Nothing that had to do with my path as a student. I felt completely
alone.
The newlyweds were obliged to dance amid the flashes of the photographer.
They spun through the room, precise in their movements. I should take note, I
thought: not even Lila, in spite of everything, has managed to escape from my
mother’s world. I have to, I can’t be acquiescent any longer. I have to eliminate
her, as Maestra Oliviero had been able to do when she arrived at our house to
impose on her what was good for me. She was restraining me by one arm but I
had to ignore her, remember that I was the best in Italian, Latin, and Greek,
remember that I had confronted the religion teacher, remember that an article
would appear with my signature in the same journal in which a handsome,
clever boy in his last year of high school wrote.
At that moment Nino Sarratore entered. I saw him before I saw Alfonso and
Marisa, I saw him and jumped up. My mother tried to hold me by the hem of
my dress and I pulled the dress away. Antonio, who hadn’t let me out of his
sight, brightened, threw me a glance of invitation. But I, moving away from
Lila and Stefano, who were now going to take their place in the middle of the
table,  between  the  Solaras  and  the  couple  from  Florence,  headed  straight
toward the entrance, toward Alfonso, Marisa, Nino.
61.
We found a seat. I made general conversation with Alfonso and Marisa, and I
hoped that Nino would say something to me. Meanwhile Antonio came up
behind me, leaned over, and whispered in my ear.
“I’ve kept a place for you.”
I whispered, “Go away, my mother has understood everything.”
He looked around uncertainly, very intimidated. He returned to his table.
There was a noise of discontent in the room. The more rancorous guests had
immediately begun to notice the things that weren’t right. The wine wasn’t the
same quality for all the tables. Some were already on the first course when
others still hadn’t been served their antipasto. Some were saying aloud that
the service was better where the relatives and friends of the bridegroom were
sitting than where the relatives and friends of the bride were. I hated those
conflicts, their mounting clamor. Boldly I drew Nino into the conversation,
asking him to tell me about his article on poverty in Naples, thinking I would
ask him afterward, naturally, for news of the next issue of the journal and my
half page. He started off with really interesting and informed talk on the state
of the city. His assurance struck me. In Ischia he had still had the features of
the tormented boy, now he seemed to me almost too grown-up. How was it
possible  that  a  boy  of  eighteen  could  speak  not  generically,  in  sorrowful
accents, about poverty, the way Pasquale did, but concretely, impersonally,
citing precise facts.
“Where did you learn those things?”
“You just have to read.”
“What?”
“Newspapers, journals, the books that deal with these problems.”
I had never even leafed through a newspaper or a magazine, I read only
novels. Lila herself, in the time when she read, had never read anything but the
dog-eared old novels of the circulating library. I was behind in everything,
Nino could help me make up ground.
I began to ask more and more questions, he answered. He answered, yes, but
he didn’t give instant answers, the way Lila did, he didn’t have her capacity to
make everything fascinating. He constructed speeches with the attitude of a
scholar, full of concrete examples, and every one of my questions was a small
push  that  set  off  a  landslide:  he  spoke  without  stopping,  without
embellishment, without any irony, harsh, cutting. Alfonso and Marisa soon felt
isolated. Marisa said, “Goodness, what a bore my brother is.” And they began to
talk to each other. Nino and I also were isolated. We no longer heard what was
happening around us: we didn’t know what was served on the plates, what we
ate or drank. I struggled to find questions, I listened closely to his endless
answers. I quickly grasped, however, that a single fixed idea constituted the
thread of his conversation and animated every sentence: the rejection of vague
words,  the  necessity  of  distinguishing  problems  clearly,  hypothesizing
practical  solutions,  intervention.  I  kept  nodding  yes,  I  declared  myself  in
agreement on everything. I assumed a puzzled expression only when he spoke
ill of literature. “If they want to be windbags,” he repeated two or three times,
very angry at his enemies, that is to say anyone who was a windbag, “let them
write novels, I’ll read them willingly; but if you really want to change things,
then it’s a different matter.” In reality—I seemed to understand—he used the
word “literature” to be critical of anyone who ruined people’s minds by means
of  what  he  called  idle  chatter.  When  I  protested  weakly,  for  example,  he
answered like this: “Too many bad gallant novels, Lenù, make a Don Quixote;
but here in Naples we, with all due respect to Don Quixote, have no need to tilt
against windmills, it’s only wasted courage: we need people who know how the
mills work and will make them work.”
In a short while I wished I could talk every day to a boy on that level: how
many mistakes I had made with him; what foolishness it had been to want him,
love him, and yet always avoid him. His father’s fault. But also my fault: I—I
who was so upset by my mother—I had let the father throw his ugly shadow
over the son? I repented, I reveled in my repentance, in the novel I felt myself
immersed in. Meanwhile I often raised my voice to be heard over the clamor of
the room, the music, and so did he. From time to time I looked at Lila’s table:
she laughed, she ate, she talked, she didn’t realize where I was, the person I
was talking to. Rarely, however, did I look toward Antonio’s table, I was afraid
he would make me a sign to join him. But I felt that he kept his eyes on me,
that  he  was  nervous,  getting  angry.  Never  mind,  I  thought,  I’ve  already
decided, I’ll break up tomorrow: I can’t go on with him, we’re too different. Of
course, he adored me, he was entirely devoted to me, but like a dog. I was
dazzled instead by the way Nino talked to me: without any subservience. He set
out his future, the ideas on the basis of which he would build it. To listen to
him lighted up my mind almost the way Lila once had. His devotion to me
made me grow. He, yes, he would take me away from my mother, he who
wanted only to leave his father.
I  felt  someone  touch  my  shoulder,  it  was  Antonio  again.  He  said,  “Let’s
dance.”
“My mother doesn’t want me to,” I whispered.
He replied, tensely, “Everyone’s dancing, what’s the problem?”
I half-smiled at Nino, embarrassed, he knew that Antonio was my boyfriend.
He looked at me seriously, he turned to Alfonso. I left.
“Don’t hold me close.”
“I’m not holding you close.”
There was a loud din, a drunken gaiety. Young people, adults, children were
dancing. But I could feel the reality behind the appearance of festivity. The
distorted  faces  of  the  bride’s  relatives  signaled  a  quarrelsome  discontent.
Especially the women. They had spent their last cent for the gift, for what they
were  wearing,  had  gone  into  debt,  and  now  they  were  treated  like  poor
relations,  with  bad  wine,  intolerable  delays  in  service?  Why  didn’t  Lila
intervene,  why  didn’t  she  protest  to  Stefano?  I  knew  them.  They  would
restrain their rage for love of Lila but at the end of the reception, when she
went  to  change,  when  she  came  back,  dressed  in  her  beautiful  traveling
clothes, when she handed out the wedding favors, when she had left, with her
husband, then a huge fight would erupt, and it would be the start of hatreds
lasting months, years, and offenses and insults that would involve husbands,
sons, all with an obligation to prove to mothers and sisters and grandmothers
that they knew how to be men. I knew all the women, the men. I saw the gazes
of the young men turned fiercely to the singer, to the musicians who looked
insultingly at their girlfriends or made allusive remarks to one another. I saw
how Enzo and Carmela talked while they danced, I saw also Pasquale and Ada
sitting at the table: it was clear that before the end of the party they would be
together and then they would be engaged and in all probability in a year, in
ten, they would marry. I saw Rino and Pinuccia. In their case everything would
happen more quickly: if the Cerullo shoe factory seriously got going, in a year
at most they would have a wedding celebration no less ostentatious than this.
They danced, they looked into each other’s eyes, they held each other closely.
Love and interest. Grocery plus shoes. Old houses plus new houses. Was I like
them? Was I still?
“Who’s that?” Antonio asked.
“Who do you think? You don’t recognize him?”
“No.”
“It’s Nino, Sarratore’s oldest son. And that’s Marisa, you remember her?”
He didn’t care at all about Marisa, about Nino he did. He said nervously, “So
first you bring me to Sarratore to threaten him, and then you sit talking to his
son for hours? I have a new suit made so I can sit watching you amuse yourself
with that kid, who doesn’t even get a haircut, doesn’t even wear a tie?”
He left me in the middle of the room and headed quickly toward the glass
door that opened onto the terrace.
For a few seconds I was uncertain what to do. Join Antonio. Return to Nino. I
had on me my mother’s gaze, even if her wandering eye seemed to be looking
elsewhere. I had on me my father’s gaze, and it was an ugly gaze. I thought: if I
go back to Nino, if I don’t join Antonio on the terrace, it will be he who leaves
me and for me it will be better like that. I crossed the room while the band kept
playing, couples continued to dance. I sat down.
Nino seemed not to have taken the least notice of what had happened. Now
he  was  speaking  in  his  torrential  way  about  Professor  Galiani.  He  was
defending her to Alfonso, who I knew detested her. He was saying that he, too,
often  ended  up  disagreeing  with  her—too  rigid—but  as  a  teacher  she  was
extraordinary, she had always encouraged him, had transmitted the capacity
to study. I tried to enter the conversation. I felt an urgent need to be caught up
again by Nino, I didn’t want him to start talking to my classmate exactly the
way, until a moment earlier, he had been talking to me. I needed—in order not
to rush to make up with Antonio, to tell him, in tears: yes, you’re right, I don’t
know what I am and what I really want, I use you and then I throw you away,
but  it’s  not  my  fault,  I  feel  half  and  half,  forgive  me—Nino  to  draw  me
exclusively into the things he knew, into his powers, to recognize me as like
him. So I almost cut him off and, while he tried to resume the interrupted
conversation, I enumerated the books that the teacher had lent me since the
beginning of the year, the advice she had given me. He nodded yes, somewhat
sulkily, he remembered that the teacher, some time earlier, had lent one of
those  texts  to  him  and  he  began  to  talk  about  it.  But  I  had  an  increasing
urgency for gratifications that would distract me from Antonio, and I asked
him, without any connection: “When will the magazine come out?”
He stared at me uncertainly, slightly apprehensive.
“It came out a couple of weeks ago.”
I had a start of joy, I asked, “Where can I find it?”
“They sell it at the Guida bookstore. Anyway I can get it for you.”
“Thank you.”
He hesitated, then he said, “But they didn’t put your piece in, it turned out
there wasn’t room.”
Alfonso suddenly smiled with relief and murmured, “Thank goodness.”
62.
We were sixteen. I was sitting with Nino Sarratore, Alfonso, Marisa, and I
made an effort to smile, I said with pretended indifference, “All right, another
time.” Lila was at the other end of the room—she was the bride, the queen of
the celebration—and Stefano was whispering in her ear and she was smiling.
The long, exhausting wedding lunch was ending. The band was playing, the
singer was singing. Antonio, with his back to me, was suppressing in his chest
the  pain  I  had  caused  him,  and  looking  at  the  sea.  Enzo  was  perhaps
murmuring to Carmela that he loved her. Rino certainly had already done so
with Pinuccia, who, as she talked, was staring into his eyes. Pasquale in all
likelihood was wandering around frightened, but Ada would manage so that,
before the party was over, she would tear out of his mouth the necessary
words. For a while toasts with obscene allusions had been tumbling out; the
metal merchant shone in that art. The floor was splattered with sauces from a
plate dropped by a child, wine spilled by Stefano’s grandfather. I swallowed my
tears. I thought: maybe they’ll publish my piece in the next issue, maybe Nino
didn’t insist enough, maybe I should have taken care of it myself. But I said
nothing, I kept smiling, I even found the energy to say, “Anyway, I already
argued  once  with  the  priest,  to  argue  a  second  time  would  have  been
pointless.”
“Right,” said Alfonso.
But nothing diminished the disappointment. I struggled to detach myself
from a sort of fog in my mind, a painful drop of tension, and I couldn’t. I
discovered that I had considered the publication of those few lines, my name in
print, as a sign that I really had a destiny, that the hard work of school would
surely lead upward, somewhere, that Maestra Oliviero had been right to push
me forward and to abandon Lila. “Do you know what the plebs are?” “Yes,
Maestra.” At that moment I knew what the plebs were, much more clearly than
when, years earlier, she had asked me. The plebs were us. The plebs were that
fight  for  food  and  wine,  that  quarrel  over  who  should  be  served  first  and
better, that dirty floor on which the waiters clattered back and forth, those
increasingly vulgar toasts. The plebs were my mother, who had drunk wine
and now was leaning against my father’s shoulder, while he, serious, laughed,
his mouth gaping, at the sexual allusions of the metal dealer. They were all
laughing, even Lila, with the expression of one who has a role and will play it
to the utmost.
Probably disgusted by the spectacle in progress, Nino got up, said he was
going. He made an arrangement with Marisa for returning home together, and
Alfonso promised to take her at the agreed-on time to the agreed-on place. She
seemed very proud of having such a dutiful knight. I said uncertainly to Nino:
“Don’t you want to greet the bride?”
He gestured broadly, he muttered something about his outfit, and, without
even a handshake, or a nod to me or Alfonso, he headed toward the door with
his  usual  swinging  gait.  He  could  enter  and  leave  the  neighborhood  as  he
wished, without being contaminated by it. He could do it, he was capable of
doing it, maybe he had learned years before, at the time of the stormy move
that had almost cost him his life.
I doubted that I could make it. Studying was useless: I could get the highest
possible  marks  on  my  work,  but  that  was  only  school:  instead,  those  who
worked at the journal had sniffed my report, my and Lila’s report, and hadn’t
printed it. Nino could do anything: he had the face, the gestures, the gait of one
who would always do better. When he left it seemed that the only person in
the whole room who had the energy to take me away had vanished.
Later I had the impression that a gust of wind had shut the door of the
restaurant. In reality there was no wind or even a banging of doors. There
happened only what could have been predicted to happen. Just in time for the
cake, for  the  favors,  the  very  handsome,  very  well-dressed  Solara  brothers
appeared. They moved through the room greeting this one and that in their
lordly way. Gigliola threw her arms around Michele’s neck and drew him down
next to her. Lila, with a sudden flush on her throat and around her eyes, pulled
her husband energetically by the arm and said something in his ear. Silvio
nodded slightly to his children, Manuela looked at them with a mother’s pride.
The singer started Lazzarella, modestly imitating Aurelio Fierro. Rino with a
friendly smile invited Marcello to sit down. Marcello sat down, loosened his tie,
crossed his legs.
The unpredictable revealed itself only at that point. I saw Lila lose her color,
become as pale as when she was a child, whiter than her wedding dress, and
her eyes had that sudden contraction that turned them into cracks. She had in
front of her a bottle of wine and I was afraid that her gaze would go through it
with a violence that would shatter it, with the wine spraying everywhere. But
she wasn’t looking at the bottle. She was looking farther away, she was looking
at the shoes of Marcello Solara.
They were Cerullo shoes for men. Not the model for sale, not the ones with
the gilded pin. Marcello had on his feet the shoes bought earlier by Stefano,
her husband. It was the pair she had made with Rino, making and unmaking
them for months, ruining her hands.
