M
ATURITY
1.
F
rom  October  1976  until  1979,  when  I  returned  to  Naples  to  live,  I  avoided
resuming  a  steady  relationship  with  Lila.  But  it  wasn’t  easy.  She  almost
immediately tried to reenter my life by force, and I ignored her, tolerated her,
endured her. Even if she acted as if there were nothing she wanted more than
to be close to me at a difficult moment, I couldn’t forget the contempt with
which she had treated me.
Today I think that if it had been only the insult that wounded me—You’re an
idiot, she had shouted on the telephone when I told her about Nino, and she
had never, ever spoken to me like that before—I would have soon calmed down.
In reality, what mattered more than that offense was the mention of Dede and
Elsa. Think of the harm you’re doing to your daughters, she had warned me,
and at the moment I had paid no attention. But over time those words acquired
greater weight, and I returned to them often. Lila had never displayed the
slightest interest in Dede and Elsa; almost certainly she didn’t even remember
their names. If, on the phone, I mentioned some intelligent remark they had
made, she cut me off, changed the subject. And when she met them for the first
time,  at  the  house  of  Marcello  Solara,  she  had  confined  herself  to  an
absentminded  glance  and  a  few  pat  phrases—she  hadn’t  paid  the  least
attention to how nicely they were dressed, how neatly their hair was combed,
how well both were able to express themselves, although they were still small.
And yet I had given birth to them, I had brought them up, they were part of
me, who had been her friend forever: she should have taken this into account—
I won’t say out of affection but at least out of politeness—for my maternal
pride. Yet she hadn’t even attempted a little good-natured sarcasm; she had
displayed indifference and nothing more. Only now—out of jealousy, surely,
because  I  had  taken  Nino—did  she  remember  the  girls,  and  wanted  to
emphasize  that  I  was  a  terrible  mother,  that  although  I  was  happy,  I  was
causing them unhappiness. The minute I thought about it I became anxious.
Had Lila worried about Gennaro when she left Stefano, when she abandoned
the child to the neighbor because of her work in the factory, when she sent
him to me as if to get him out of the way? Ah, I had my faults, but I was
certainly more a mother than she was.
2.
Such thoughts became a habit in those years. It was as if Lila, who, after all,
had uttered only that one malicious remark about Dede and Elsa, had become
the defense lawyer for their needs as daughters, and, every time I neglected
them to devote myself to myself, I felt obliged to prove to her that she was
wrong. But it was a voice invented by ill feeling; what she really thought of my
behavior as a mother I don’t know. Only she can say if, in fact, she has managed
to insert herself into this extremely long chain of words to modify my text, to
purposely supply the missing links, to unhook others without letting it show,
to say of me more than I want, more than I’m able to say. I wish for this
intrusion, I’ve hoped for it ever since I began to write our story, but I have to
get to the end in order to check all the pages. If I tried now, I would certainly
get stuck. I’ve been writing for too long, and I’m tired; it’s more and more
difficult to keep the thread of the story taut within the chaos of the years, of
events large and small, of moods. So either I tend to pass over my own affairs
to recapture Lila and all the complications she brings with her or, worse, I let
myself be carried away by the events of my life, only because it’s easier to write
them. But I have to avoid this choice. I mustn’t take the first path, on which, if I
set myself aside, I would end up finding ever fewer traces of Lila—since the
very nature of our relationship dictates that I can reach her only by passing
through myself. But I shouldn’t take the second, either. That, in fact, I speak of
my experience in increasingly greater detail is just what she would certainly
favor. Come on—she would say—tell us what turn your life took, who cares
about mine, admit that it doesn’t even interest you. And she would conclude:
I’m a scribble on a scribble, completely unsuitable for one of your books; forget
it, Lenù, one doesn’t tell the story of an erasure.
What to do, then? Admit yet again that she’s right? Accept that to be adult is
to disappear, is to learn to hide to the point of vanishing? Admit that, as the
years pass, the less I know of Lila?
This morning I keep weariness at bay and sit down again at the desk. Now
that I’m close to the most painful part of our story, I want to seek on the page a
balance between her and me that in life I couldn’t find even between myself
and me.
3.
Of the days in Montpellier I remember everything except the city; it’s as if
I’d never been there. Outside the hotel, outside the vast assembly hall where
the academic conference that Nino was attending took place, today I see only a
windy autumn and a blue sky resting on white clouds. And yet in my memory
that  place-name,  Montpellier,  has  for  many  reasons  remained  a  symbol  of
escape.  I  had  been  out  of  Italy  once,  in  Paris,  with  Franco,  and  I  had  felt
exhilarated by my own audacity. But then it seemed to me that my world was
and would forever remain the neighborhood, Naples, while the rest was like a
brief outing in whose special climate I could imagine myself as I would never in
fact be. Montpellier, on the other hand, although it was far less exciting than
Paris,  gave  me  the  impression  that  my  boundaries  had  burst  and  I  was
expanding. The pure and simple fact of being in that place constituted in my
eyes the proof that the neighborhood, Naples, Pisa, Florence, Milan, Italy itself
were only tiny fragments of the world and that I would do well not to be
satisfied with those fragments any longer. In Montpellier I felt the limitations
of my outlook, of the language in which I expressed myself and in which I had
written. In Montpellier it seemed to me evident how restrictive, at thirty-two,
being a wife and mother might be. And in all those days charged with love I
felt, for the first time, freed from the chains I had accumulated over the years—
those of my origins, those I had acquired through academic success, those
derived from the choices I had made in life, especially marriage. There I also
understood the reasons for the pleasure I had felt, in the past, on seeing my
first book translated into other languages and, at the same time, the reasons
for my disappointment at finding few readers outside Italy. It was marvelous to
cross borders, to let oneself go within other cultures, discover the provisional
nature of what I had taken for absolute. The fact that Lila had never been out
of Naples, that she was afraid even of San Giovanni a Teduccio—if in the past I
had judged it an arguable choice that she was nevertheless able, as usual, to
turn into an advantage—now seemed to me simply a sign of mental limitation.
I  reacted  the  way  you  do  to  someone  who  insults  you  by  using  the  same
formulations that offended you. You were wrong about me? No, my dear, it’s I, I who
was wrong about you: you will spend the rest of your life looking out at the trucks
passing on the stradone.
The days flew by. The organizers of the conference had reserved for Nino a
single room in the hotel, and since I had decided so late to go with him, there
was no way to change it to a double. So we had separate rooms, but every night
I took a shower, got ready for bed, and then, with trepidation, went to his
room. We slept together, clinging to each other, as if we feared that a hostile
force would separate us in sleep. In the morning we had breakfast in bed, a
luxury that I had seen only in movies; we laughed, we were happy. During the
day I went with him to the assembly hall and, although the speakers read their
endless pages in a bored tone, being with him was exciting; I sat next to him
but without disturbing him. Nino followed the talks attentively, took notes,
and every so often whispered in my ear ironic comments and words of love. At
lunch and dinner we mixed with academics from all over the world, foreign
names, foreign languages. Of course, the participants with bigger reputations
were at a table of their own; we sat in a large group of younger scholars. But I
was struck by Nino’s mobility, both during the events and at the restaurants.
How different he was from the student of long ago, even from the youth who
had defended me in the bookstore in Milan almost ten years earlier. He had
abandoned polemical tones, he tactfully crossed academic barriers, established
relations with a serious yet engaging demeanor. Now in English (excellent),
now in French (good), he conversed brilliantly, displaying his old devotion to
figures and efficiency. I was filled with pride at how well liked he was. In a few
hours he had charmed everyone, and was invited here and there.
There was a single moment when he changed abruptly. The evening before
he  was  to  speak  at  the  conference,  he  became  aloof  and  rude;  he  seemed
overwhelmed by anxiety. He began to disparage the text he had prepared, he
kept repeating that writing for him wasn’t as easy as it was for me, he became
angry  because  he  hadn’t  had  time  to  work  well.  I  felt  guilty—was  it  our
complicated affair that had distracted him?—and tried to help, hugging him,
kissing him, urging him to read me the pages. He did read them, with the air of
a frightened schoolboy, which touched me. To me the speech seemed as dull as
the ones I had heard in the assembly hall, but I praised it and he calmed down.
The next morning he performed with practiced warmth and was applauded.
That evening one of the big-name academics, an American, invited him to sit
with him. I was left alone, but I wasn’t sorry. When Nino was there, I didn’t talk
to anyone, while in his absence I was forced to manage with my halting French,
and I became friendly with a couple from Paris. I liked them because I quickly
discovered that they were in a situation not very different from ours. Both
considered the institution of the family suffocating, both had painfully left
spouses and children, both seemed happy. He, Augustin, was around fifty, with
a ruddy face, lively blue eyes, a bushy pale-blond mustache. She, Colombe, was
a little over thirty, like me; she had very short black hair, eyes and lips drawn
sharply on a tiny face, a charming elegance. I talked mainly to Colombe, who
had a child of seven.
“In a few months,” I said, “my older daughter will turn seven, but she’s
going into second grade this year—she’s very bright.”
“My son is extremely clever and imaginative.”
“How did he take the separation?”
“Fine.”
“He didn’t get even a little upset?”
“Children aren’t rigid, the way we are: they’re flexible.”
She  dwelled  on  the  flexibility  she  ascribed  to  childhood;  it  seemed  to
reassure  her.  She  added:  in  our  world  it’s  fairly  common  for  parents  to
separate, and children know it’s possible. But just as I was saying that I didn’t
know  other  separated  women,  apart  from  one  friend,  her  tone  changed
abruptly and she began to complain about the child: he’s smart but slow, she
exclaimed, at school they say he’s unruly. I was struck by the change; she
expressed  herself  without  tenderness,  almost  bitterly,  as  if  her  son  were
behaving like that to spite her, and this made me anxious. Her companion
must have noticed, and he interrupted, boasting about his two boys, fourteen
and eighteen, and joking about how attractive they were to women, both old
and young. When Nino returned, the two men—especially Augustin—began to
criticize the speakers. Colombe joined in almost immediately, with a slightly
artificial gaiety. The maliciousness soon created a bond. Augustin talked and
drank a lot all evening, his companion laughed whenever Nino managed to say
a word. They invited us to drive to Paris with them, in their car.
The conversation about children, and that invitation that we didn’t say yes
or no to, brought me back to reality. Until that moment Dede and Elsa, and also
Pietro,  had  been  on  my  mind  constantly,  but  as  if  suspended  in  a  parallel
universe, motionless around the kitchen table in Florence, or in front of the
television,  or  in  their  beds.  Suddenly  my  world  and  theirs  were  back  in
communication. I realized that the days in Montpellier were about to end, that
inevitably Nino and I would return to our homes, that we would have to face
our respective marital crises, I in Florence, he in Naples. And the children’s
bodies rejoined mine, I felt the contact violently. I had no news of them for five
days, and as I became aware of that I felt an intense nausea, an unbearable
longing for them. I was afraid not of the future in general, which now seemed
inescapably occupied by Nino, but of the hours that were about to come, of
tomorrow,  of  the  day  after.  I  couldn’t  resist  and  although  it  was  almost
midnight—what’s the difference, I said to myself, Pietro is always awake—I
tried to telephone.
It was fairly laborious, but finally the call went through. Hello, I said. Hello, I
repeated. I knew that Pietro was at the other end of the line, I called him by
name: Pietro, it’s Elena, how are the girls. The connection was cut off. I waited
a few minutes, then I asked the operator to call again. I was determined to
continue all night, but this time Pietro answered.
“What do you want?”
“Tell me about the children.”
“They’re sleeping.”
“I know, but how are they?”
“What is it to you.”
“They’re my children.”
“You left them, they don’t want to be your children anymore.”
“They told you?”
“They told my mother.”
“You had Adele come?”
“Yes.”
“Tell them I’ll be home in a few days.”
“No, don’t come back. Neither I, nor the children, nor my mother wants to
see you again.”
4.
I had a cry, then I calmed down and went to Nino. I wanted to tell him about
that phone call, I wanted him to console me. But as I was about to knock on his
door  I  heard  him  talking  to  someone.  I  hesitated.  He  was  on  the  phone.  I
couldn’t  understand  what  he  was  saying,  or  even  what  language  he  was
speaking, but right away I thought that he was talking to his wife. So did this
happen every evening? When I went to my room to get ready for the night and
he was alone, he telephoned Eleonora? Were they looking for a way to separate
without  fighting?  Or  were  they  reconciling  and,  once  the  interlude  of
Montpellier was over, she would take him back?
I decided to knock. Nino broke off, silence, then he began talking again but
lowered his voice. I became nervous, I knocked again, nothing happened. I had
to  knock  a  third  time,  hard,  before  he  came  to  the  door.  I  immediately
confronted him, I accused him of hiding me from his wife, I cried that I had
telephoned Pietro, that my husband didn’t want to let me see my children, that
I was calling into question my entire life, while he was cooing on the telephone
with Eleonora. It was a terrible night of quarreling; we struggled to make up.
Nino tried everything to soothe me: he laughed nervously, he got angry at
Pietro for the way he had treated me, he kissed me, I pushed him away, he said
I was crazy. But no matter how I pressed him he never admitted that he was
talking to his wife, in fact he swore on his son that since the day he left Naples
he hadn’t talked to her.
“Then who were you calling?”
“A colleague here in the hotel.”
“At midnight?”
“At midnight.”
“Liar.”
“It’s the truth.”
I refused for a long time to make love, I couldn’t, I was afraid that he no
longer loved me. Then I yielded, in order not to have to believe that it was all
already over.
The next morning, for the first time in almost five days of living together, I
woke in a bad mood. We had to leave, the conference was nearly over. But I
didn’t want Montpellier to be merely an interlude; I was afraid to go home,
afraid that Nino would go home, afraid of losing my children forever. When
Augustin and Colombe again suggested that we drive to Paris with them, and
even  offered  to  put  us  up,  I  turned  to  Nino,  hoping  that  he,  too,  wanted
nothing more than the chance to extend this time, put off the return. But he
shook his head sadly, he said: Impossible, we have to go back to Italy, and he
talked about flights, tickets, trains, money. I was fragile, I felt disappointment
and rancor. I was right, I thought, he lied to me, the break with his wife isn’t
conclusive. He had talked to her every night, he had pledged to return home
after the conference, he couldn’t delay even a couple of days. And me?
I remembered the publisher in Nanterre and my short, scholarly story about
the male invention of woman. Until that moment I hadn’t talked about myself
to anyone, even Nino. I had been the smiling but nearly mute woman who slept
with the brilliant professor from Naples, the woman always pasted to him,
attentive to his needs, to his thoughts. But now I said with false cheer: It’s Nino
who has to return, I have an engagement in Nanterre; a work of mine is about
to come out—or maybe it’s already out—a half essay, half story; I just might
leave with you, and stop in at the publisher’s. The two looked at me as if only
at that moment had I actually begun to exist, and they went on to ask me about
my work. I told them, and it turned out that Colombe knew well the woman
who  was  the  head  of  the  small  but—as  I  discovered  at  that  moment—
prestigious publishing house. I let myself go, I talked with too much vivacity
and maybe I exaggerated a little about my literary career. I did it not for the
two French people but, rather, for Nino. I wanted to remind him that I had a
rewarding life of my own, that if I had been capable of leaving my children and
Pietro, then I could also do without him, and not in a week, not in ten days:
immediately.
He listened, then he said seriously to Colombe and Augustin: All right, if it’s
not a bother for you we’ll take advantage of the ride. But when we were alone
he made me a speech anxious in tone and passionate in content, whose sense
was that I should trust him, that although our situation was complicated we
would  surely  untangle  it,  that  to  do  so,  however,  we  had  to  go  home,  we
couldn’t flee from Montpellier to Paris and then to who knows what other city,
we had to confront our spouses and begin our life together. Suddenly I felt that
he was not only reasonable but sincere. I was confused, I embraced him, I
murmured agreement. And yet we left for Paris; I wanted just a few more days.
5.
It  was  a  long  trip.  There  was  a  strong  wind,  and  sometimes  rain.  The
landscape had a rust-caked pallor, but at times the sky broke and everything
became brilliant, starting with the rain. I clung to Nino and, now and then, fell
asleep on his shoulder; I began again to feel, with pleasure, that I was far
beyond my margins. I liked the foreign language that echoed in the car, I was
pleased that I was heading in the direction of a book that I had written in
Italian  and  that,  thanks  to  Mariarosa,  was  being  published  first  in  another
language.  What  an  extraordinary  fact—how  many  amazing  things  were
happening to me. That little volume was like a rock that I had hurled along an
unpredictable trajectory and at a speed that had no comparison with that of
the rocks that as girls Lila and I had thrown at the gangs of boys.
But  the  journey  wasn’t  always  pleasant;  sometimes  I  became  sad.  And  I
quickly formed the impression that Nino was talking to Colombe in a tone that
he didn’t use with Augustin, not to mention that too often he touched her
shoulder with his fingertips. My bad mood gradually worsened, as I saw the
two of them were getting very friendly. When we arrived in Paris they were
the best of friends, chatting away; she laughed often, smoothing her hair with
a careless gesture.
Augustin  lived  in  a  nice  apartment  on  Canal  Saint-Martin;  Colombe  had
recently moved in. Even after they showed us our room, they wouldn’t let us to
go bed. It seemed to me that they were afraid to be alone, they wouldn’t stop
talking. I was tired and nervous; I was the one who had wanted to go to Paris,
and now it seemed absurd to be in that house, among strangers, far from my
daughters, with Nino paying scant attention to me. Once in the room I asked
him:
“Do you like Colombe?”
“She’s nice.”
“I asked if you like her.”
“Do you want to quarrel?”
“No.”
“Then think about it: how can I like Colombe if I love you?”
It scared me when his tone became even slightly harsh; I was afraid I would
have to acknowledge that something between us wasn’t working. He is simply
nice to anyone who has been nice to us, I said to myself, and fell asleep. But I
slept badly. At one point I had the impression that I was alone in the bed; I
tried to wake up, but was drawn back into sleep. I emerged again sometime
later. Nino now was standing in the dark, or so it seemed to me. Sleep, he said. I
fell asleep again.
The next day our hosts took us to Nanterre. The whole way Nino continued
to joke with Colombe, to talk to her in an allusive way. I tried not to pay
attention. How could I think of living with him if I had to spend my time
watching him? When we reached our destination and he became genial and
charming with Mariarosa’s friend, the owner of the publishing house, and her
partner—one  around  forty,  the  other  sixty—I  drew  a  sigh  of  relief.  It’s
innocent, I concluded, he’s like that with all women. And finally I felt better.
The  two  women  greeted  me  warmly,  full  of  praise,  and  asked  about
Mariarosa. I knew that my volume had only just arrived in the bookstores, but
already a couple of reviews had appeared. The older woman showed them to
me; she seemed amazed herself at how positive they were, and, turning to
Colombe, to Augustin, to Nino, she kept repeating it. I read the articles, two
lines here, four there. They were written by women—I had never heard of
them,  but  Colombe  and  the  two  women  had—and  they  praised  the  book
enthusiastically.  I  should  have  been  pleased;  the  day  before,  I  had  been
compelled to sing my own praises, and now I no longer needed to. Yet I found
that I couldn’t feel excited. It was as if, since I loved Nino and he loved me, that
love made everything good that happened to me and would happen to me
nothing but a pleasant secondary effect. I showed my satisfaction graciously
and gave a feeble assent to my publishers’ plans for promotion. You’ll have to
return soon, the older woman exclaimed, or at least we hope so. The younger
added: Mariarosa told us about your marital crisis; we hope you’ll come out of
it without too much suffering.
In this way I discovered that the news of the break between me and Pietro
had reached not only Adele but Milan and even France. Better that way, I
thought; it will be easier to make the separation permanent. I said to myself:
I’ll take what’s mine, and I mustn’t live in fear of losing Nino, I mustn’t worry
about Dede and Elsa. I’m fortunate, he will always love me, my daughters are
my daughters, everything will work out.
6.
We  returned  to  Rome.  We  promised  each  other  everything  as  we  said
goodbye,  we  did  nothing  but  promise.  Then  Nino  left  for  Naples  and  I  for
Florence.
I returned home almost on tiptoe, convinced that one of the most difficult
trials  of  my  life  awaited  me.  Instead  the  children  greeted  me  with
apprehensive joy, and began tagging after me through the house—not only
Elsa but Dede, too—as if they were afraid that if they lost sight of me I would
disappear again. Adele was polite and didn’t mention even once the situation
that  had  brought  her  to  my  house;  Pietro,  very  pale,  confined  himself  to
handing me a piece of paper with a list of phone calls for me (Lila’s name
appeared at least four times), muttered that he had to go to work, and two
hours later had disappeared, without even saying goodbye to his mother or the
children.
It took a few days for Adele to manifest her opinion plainly: she wanted me
to return to myself and to my husband. But it took several weeks to convince
her that I really didn’t want either of those things. In that time she never
raised  her  voice,  never  lost  her  temper,  didn’t  even  comment  sarcastically
about my frequent long phone calls to Nino. She was more interested in the
phone calls from the two women in Nanterre, who were keeping me informed
of the progress of the book and of a calendar of engagements that would lead
to a tour in France. She wasn’t surprised at the positive reviews in the French
papers; she was sure that the book would soon get the same attention in Italy,
she said that in our papers she would have been able to obtain better. Above all
she insistently praised my intelligence, my education, my courage, and on no
account did she defend her son, who, besides, was never around.
I  assumed  that  Pietro  did  not  really  have  work  obligations  outside  of
Florence. Rather, I was immediately convinced, with rage and even a hint of
contempt, that he had entrusted the resolution of our crisis to his mother and
was holed up somewhere to work on his interminable book. Once, I couldn’t
contain myself and I said to Adele: “It was really difficult to live with your son.”
“There’s no man it’s not difficult to live with.”
“With him, believe me, it’s been especially difficult.”
“You think it will go better with Nino?”
“Yes.”
“I’ve asked around, the talk about him in Milan is very nasty.”
“I don’t need the talk of Milan. I’ve loved him for twenty years and you can
spare me the gossip. I know more about him than anyone else.”
“How you like saying you love him.”
“Why shouldn’t I like it?”
“You’re right, why? I was wrong: it’s pointless to open the eyes of someone
in love.”
From then on we stopped talking about Nino. And when I left the girls with
her to rush to Naples she didn’t bat an eye. She didn’t bat an eye even when I
told her that, when I returned from Naples, I would have to go to France and
would be there for a week. She asked only, with a slightly ironic inflection:
“Will you be here for Christmas? Will you be with the children?”
The question almost offended me, I answered: “Of course.”
I filled my suitcase mainly with elegant underwear and stylish dresses. At
the announcement of my new departure Dede and Elsa, who never asked about
their father, even though they hadn’t seen him for a long time, were extremely
upset. Dede went so far as to yell words that were surely not hers: go, get out,
you’re mean and hateful. I glanced at Adele, hoping that she would try to get
her to play, and distract her, but she did nothing. When they saw me go to the
door they began to cry. Elsa started it, shrieking, I want to come with you. Dede
resisted, she tried to show me all her indifference, maybe even her scorn, but
finally she gave in and became even more desperate than her sister. I had to
tear myself away from them, they held on to my dress, they wanted me to
leave the suitcase. Their cries pursued me to the street.
The  trip  to  Naples  seemed  very  long.  Nearing  the  city  I  looked  out  the
window. As the train slowed down, sliding into the urban space, I was seized by
an anxious exhaustion. I noticed the ugliness of the periphery, with the small
gray  apartment  buildings  beyond  the  tracks;  the  pylons,  the  lights  of  the
signals, the stone parapets. When the train entered the station it seemed to me
that the Naples I felt bound to, the Naples I was returning to, was now summed
up only in Nino. I knew that he was in worse trouble than I was. Eleonora had
thrown him out of the house; for him, too, everything had become provisional.
For several weeks he had been staying at the house of a university colleague
who lived near the Duomo. Where would he take me, what would we do? And,
above all, what decisions would we make, since we hadn’t the least idea of a
concrete solution to our situation? The only thing clear to me was that I was
burning with desire, I couldn’t wait to see him. I got out of the train terrified
that something had kept him from coming to meet me. But he was there: tall as
he was, he stood out in the stream of travelers.
This reassured me, and I was even more reassured to find that he had taken
a room in a small hotel in Mergellina, thus showing that he had no intention of
hiding me in his friend’s house. We were mad with love, the time flew. In the
evening we walked along the sea clinging to each other; he put an arm around
my shoulders, and every so often leaned over to kiss me. I tried in every way
possible  to  persuade  him  to  go  to  France  with  me.  He  was  tempted,  then
retreated, taking refuge behind his work at the university. He never spoke of
Eleonora or Albertino, as if the mere mention of them could ruin the joy of our
being together. I instead told him about the girls’ desperation, I said we had to
find a solution as quickly as possible. I felt he was nervous; I was sensitive to
the slightest tension, I was afraid that at any moment he might say: I can’t do
it, I’m going home. But I was wide of the mark. When we went to dinner he
revealed what the problem was. He said, becoming suddenly serious, that there
was some vexing news.
“Let’s hear it,” I whispered.
“This morning Lina called me.”
“Ah.”
“She wants to see us.”
7.
The evening was spoiled. Nino said it was my mother-in-law who had told
Lila that I was in Naples. He spoke with great embarrassment, choosing his
words carefully, emphasizing points like: she didn’t have my address; she asked
my sister for the phone number of my colleague; she telephoned a little before
I was about to leave for the station; I didn’t tell you right away because I was
afraid  you  would  get  angry  and  our  day  would  be  ruined.  He  concluded,
desolate: “You know what she’s like, I’ve never been able to say no to her. We
have an appointment with her tomorrow at eleven, she’ll be at the entrance to
the metro at Piazza Amedeo.”
I couldn’t control myself:
“How long have you been back in touch? Have you seen each other?”
“What are you talking about? Absolutely not.”
“I don’t believe you.”
“Elena, I swear I haven’t talked to or seen Lila since 1963.”
“You know the child wasn’t yours?”
“She told me this morning.”
“So you talked for a long time, and about intimate things.”
“She was the one who brought up the child.”
“And you—in all this time you were never curious to know more about it?”
“It’s my problem, I don’t see the need to discuss it.”
“Your problems are also mine now. We have a lot to talk about, time is short,
and I didn’t leave my children to waste it with Lina. How could it possibly have
occurred to you to make this date?”
“I thought it would please you. But there’s the telephone: call your friend
and tell her that we have a lot to do, you can’t see her.”
There, suddenly he lost patience, I was silent. Yes, I knew what Lila was like.
Ever since I returned to Florence she had been calling often, but I had other
things to think about and not only did I always hang up, I had also asked Adele
—if she happened to answer—to say that I wasn’t home. Lila, however, hadn’t
given up. It was therefore likely that she had found out from Adele about my
presence in Naples, likely that she had taken for granted that I would not go to
the neighborhood, likely that, to see me, she had found a way of getting in
touch with Nino. What was the harm? And above all what did I expect? I had
always known that he had loved Lila and that Lila had loved him. So? It had
happened long ago, and to be jealous was inappropriate. I slowly caressed his
hand, I murmured: All right, tomorrow we’ll go to Piazza Amedeo.
We  ate,  and  he  talked  for  a  long  time  about  our  future.  Nino  made  me
promise that I would ask for a separation as soon as I returned from France.
Meanwhile he assured me that he had already been in touch with a lawyer
friend of his and that even if it was all complicated, and certainly Eleonora and
her relatives would make things hard for him, he had decided to go ahead. You
know, he said, here in Naples these things are more difficult: when it comes to
a backward mentality and bad manners my wife’s relatives are no different
from  mine  and  yours,  even  if  they  have  money  and  are  high-ranking
professionals. And, as if to explain himself better, he began to speak well of my
in-laws.  Unfortunately,  he  exclaimed,  I’m  not  dealing,  as  you  are,  with
respectable  people,  like  the  Airotas,  people  he  described  as  having  grand
cultural traditions, admirable civility.
I listened, but now Lila was there between us, at our table, and I couldn’t
push  her  away.  While  Nino  talked,  I  remembered  the  trouble  she  had  got
herself in just to be with him, heedless of what Stefano could do to her, or her
brother, or Michele Solara. And the mention of our parents for a fraction of a
second brought me back to Ischia, to the evening on the beach of the Maronti—
Lila with Nino in Forio, I on the damp sand with Donato—and I felt horror.
This, I thought, is a secret that I will never be able to tell him. How many words
remain unsayable even between a couple in love, and how the risk is increased
that others might say them, destroying it. His father and I, he and Lila. I tore
away revulsion, I mentioned Pietro, what he was suffering. Nino flared up, it
was his turn to be jealous, I tried to reassure him. He demanded clean breaks
and full stops, I demanded them, too: they seemed to us indispensable to the
start of a new life. We discussed when, where. Work chained Nino inescapably
to Naples, the children chained me to Florence.
“Come and live here,” he said suddenly. “Move as soon as you can.”
“Impossible, Pietro has to be able to see the children.”
“Take turns: you’ll take them to him, the next time he’ll come here.”
“He won’t agree.”
“He’ll agree.”
The evening went on like that. The more we examined the question, the
more complicated it seemed; the more we imagined a life together—every day,
every night—the more we desired it and the difficulties vanished. Meanwhile
in the empty restaurant the waiters whispered to each other, yawned. Nino
paid,  and  we  went  back  along  the  sea  walk,  which  was  still  lively.  For  a
moment, as I looked at the dark water and smelled its odor, it seemed that the
neighborhood  was  much  farther  away  than  when  I  had  gone  to  Pisa,  to
Florence. Even Naples, suddenly, seemed very far from Naples. And Lila from
Lila, I felt that beside me I had not her but my own anxieties. Only Nino and I
were close, very close. I whispered in his ear: Let’s go to bed.
8.
The next day I got up early and shut myself in the bathroom. I took a long
shower, I dried my hair carefully, worrying that the hotel hair dryer, which
blew violently, would give it the wrong wave. A little before ten I woke Nino,
who, still dazed by sleep, was full of compliments for my dress. He tried to pull
me down beside him, I drew back. Although I made an effort to pretend there
was nothing wrong, I had trouble forgiving him. He had transformed our new
day of love into Lila’s day, and now the time was completely indelibly marked
by that looming encounter.
I dragged him to breakfast, he followed submissively. He didn’t laugh, he
didn’t tease me, he said, touching my hair with his fingertips: You look very
nice. Evidently he perceived that I was anxious. And I was, I was afraid that Lila
would arrive looking her best. I was made as I was made; she was elegant by
nature. And, besides, she had new money, if she wanted she could take care of
herself as she had done as a girl with Stefano’s money. I didn’t want Nino to be
dazzled by her again.
We left around ten-thirty, in a cold wind. We walked, unhurried, toward
Piazza Amedeo. I was shivering, even though I was wearing a heavy coat and he
had an arm around my shoulders. We never mentioned Lila. Nino talked in a
somewhat artificial way about how Naples had improved now that there was a
Communist mayor, and he began pressing me again to join him as soon as
possible with the children. He held me close as we walked, and I hoped he
would keep holding me until we reached the subway station. I wanted Lila to
be at the metro entrance, to see us from a distance, to find us handsome, to be
forced to think: a perfect couple. But, a few meters from the meeting place, he
released his arm, lighted a cigarette. I took his hand instinctively, squeezed it
hard, and we entered the piazza like that.
I didn’t see Lila right away and for a moment I hoped she hadn’t come. Then
I heard her call me—she called me in her usual imperative way, as though it
could  never  even  occur  to  her  that  I  wouldn’t  hear  her,  wouldn’t  turn,
wouldn’t obey her voice. She was in the doorway of the café opposite  the
metro tunnel, her hands stuck in the pockets of an ugly brown coat, thinner
than usual, slightly bent, her shining black hair traversed by trails of silver and
tied in a ponytail. She seemed to me the usual Lila, the adult Lila, a Lila marked
by the factory experience: she had done nothing to dress up. She hugged me
tight, in an intense embrace that I returned without energy, then she kissed
me on the cheeks with two sharp smacks, and a contented laugh. She held out
her hand to Nino absently.
We sat inside the bar; she did almost all the talking and addressed me as if
we were alone. She immediately confronted my hostility, which evidently she
read  in  my  face,  and  said  affectionately,  smiling:  All  right,  I  was  wrong,  I
offended you, but now, enough, how is it that you’ve become so touchy, you
know that I like everything about you, let’s make up.
I avoided her, with tepid half-smiles, I didn’t say yes or no. She was sitting
opposite Nino, but she never looked or spoke to him. She was there for me;
once,  she  took  my  hand  but  I  quietly  withdrew  it.  She  wanted  us  to  be
reconciled, she intended to reinstate herself in my life again, even if she didn’t
agree with the direction I was taking it. I realized this from the way she added
question to question without paying attention to the answers. She was so eager
to reoccupy every corner that she had scarcely touched on one subject when
she immediately went on to another.
“With Pietro?”
“Badly.”
“And your daughters?”
“They’re well.”
“You’ll get divorced?”
“Yes.”
“And you two will live together?”
“Yes.”
“Where, what city?”
“I don’t know.”
“Come back here to live.”
“It’s complicated.”
“I’ll find you an apartment.”
“If it’s necessary I’ll let you know.”
“Are you writing?”
“I’ve published a book.”
“Another?”
“Yes.”
“No one’s said anything about it.”
“For now it’s only come out in France.”
“In French?”
“Yes.”
“A novel?”
“A story, but it has a thesis.”
“What’s it about?”
I was vague, I cut her off. I preferred to ask about Enzo, about Gennaro,
about the neighborhood, about her work. At the mention of her son she took
on a look of amusement, and declared that I would see him soon; he was still at
school now, but he was coming with Enzo and there would also be a nice
surprise. About the neighborhood, on the other hand, she assumed an attitude
of  indifference.  Alluding  to  the  terrible  death  of  Manuela  Solara  and  the
turmoil it had unleashed, she said: It’s nothing, people are murdered here the
way  they  are  everywhere  in  Italy.  Then,  surprisingly,  she  mentioned  my
mother, praising her energy and her resourcefulness, even though she was
well aware of our turbulent relationship. And, just as surprisingly, she seemed
affectionate toward her own parents; she said that she was putting money
aside to buy the apartment where they had always lived, to give them some
peace of mind. It’s a pleasure for me—she explained, as if she had to apologize
for that generosity—I was born there, I’m attached to it, and if Enzo and I work
hard we can afford it. She worked as much as twelve hours a day now, not only
for Michele Solara but also for other clients. I’m studying—she said—a new
machine, the System 32, much better than the one I showed you when you
came to Acerra: it’s a white case that incorporates a tiny six-inch monitor, a
keyboard, and a printer. She talked on and on about more advanced systems
that were coming. She was very well informed, as usual she got excited about
the new things, even though she’d be sick of them in a few days. The new
machine had a beauty of its own, according to her. Too bad, she said, that apart
from the machine, everything was shit.
At that point Nino broke in, and did exactly the opposite of what until that
moment I had done: he began to give her detailed information. He spoke with
excitement about my book, he said that it was coming out soon in Italy, too; he
cited the success of the French reviews, he pointed out that I had a lot of
problems with my husband and my daughters, he talked about his break with
his wife, he repeated that the only solution was to live in Naples, he even
encouraged her to find us a house, he asked some knowledgeable questions
about her and Enzo’s work.
I listened somewhat apprehensively. His manner as he spoke was distant, to
show me, first, that he really hadn’t seen Lila before; and, second, that she no
longer had  any  influence  over  him.  And  not for  an  instant  did  he  use the
seductive tones that he had used with Colombe and which habitually came to
him with women. He didn’t invent sentimental locutions, he never looked her
straight in the eye, he didn’t touch her: his voice became a little warmer only
when he praised me.
This didn’t prevent me from remembering the beach at Citara, and how he
and Lila had made use of the most varied subjects to reach an understanding
and cut me out. But it seemed to me that now the opposite was happening.
Even when they asked each other questions and answered them, they ignored
each other and addressed me, as if I were their only interlocutor.
They went on talking for a good half hour without agreeing about anything.
I was surprised especially by the way they insisted on their differences about
Naples. My political knowledge was by now feeble: the care of the children, the
study in preparation for my little book, the writing of it, and, above all, the
upheaval of my personal life had kept me even from reading the newspaper.
The two of them, on the other hand, knew everything about everything. Nino
listed  names  of  Neapolitan  Communists  and  socialists  he  knew  well,  and
trusted. He praised an administration that, finally, was honest, led by a mayor
whom he called respectable, likable, a stranger to the usual old corruption. He
concluded: now at last there are good reasons to live and work here, this is a
great opportunity, we have to be part of it. But Lila made sarcastic comments
about  everything  he  said.  Naples,  she  said,  is  disgusting,  exactly  as  it  was
before,  and  if  you’re  not  teaching  the  monarchists,  fascists,  and  Christian
Democrats a good lesson for all the filthy things they’ve done, if you just forget
about it, as the left is doing, soon the shopkeepers—she laughed a little harshly
after saying the word—will take back the city, along with the city bureaucracy,
the lawyers,  the accountants,  the banks,  and the  Camorrists. I  was  quickly
forced to realize that even at the center of that discussion they had put me.
They  both  wanted  me  to  return  to  Naples,  but  each  was  openly  intent  on
detaching me from the influence of the other and was urging me to move to
the city that each was imagining: Nino’s was at peace and heading toward good
government; Lila’s was taking revenge on all the predators, it didn’t give a
damn about Communists and socialists, it was starting over from zero.
I studied them the whole time. It struck me that, the more complex the
themes that emerged in the conversation, the more Lila tended to unfold her
secret Italian, which I knew she was capable of but which on that occasion
astonished  me,  because  every  sentence  demonstrated  that  she  was  more
cultured than she wished to appear. As for Nino, who was usually brilliant, self-
confident, he chose his words warily, and at times seemed intimidated. They’re
both uneasy, I thought. In the past they exposed themselves to each other
openly and now they’re ashamed of having done so. What is happening at this
moment? Are they deceiving me? Are they really fighting over me or are they
only trying to keep their old attraction under control? I purposely gave signs
of  impatience.  Lila  noticed,  she  got  up  and  disappeared  as  if  to  go  to  the
bathroom. I didn’t say a word, I was afraid of seeming aggressive toward Nino,
and he, too, was silent. When Lila returned, she exclaimed cheerfully: “Come
on, it’s time, let’s go see Gennaro.”
“We can’t,” I said, “we have an engagement.”
“My son is really fond of you, he’ll be disappointed.”
“Say hello from me, tell him I love him, too.”
“I have an appointment in Piazza dei Martiri: it’s just ten minutes, we’ll say
hello to Alfonso and then you’ll go.”
I stared at her, she suddenly narrowed her eyes as if to hide them. Was that
her plan, then? She wanted to take Nino to the Solaras’ old shoe store, take him
back to the place where, for almost a year, they had been secret lovers?
I answered with a half smile: No, I’m sorry, we really have to run. And I
glanced at Nino, who immediately gestured to the waiter, to pay. Lila said: I’ve
already done it, and while he protested she turned to me again, insisting in a
cajoling  tone:  “Gennaro  isn’t  coming  by  himself,  Enzo’s  bringing  him.  And
someone else is coming with them, someone who’s dying to see you, it would
really be terrible if you left without seeing him.”
The  person  was  Antonio  Cappuccio,  my  teenage  boyfriend,  whom  the
Solaras, after the murder of their mother, had swiftly recalled from Germany.
9.
Lila told me that Antonio had come by himself for Manuela’s funeral, so thin
that he was almost unrecognizable. Within a few days he had rented a place
near Melina, who lived with Stefano and Ada, and had sent for his German wife
and three children. It was true, then, that he was married, it was true that he
had children. Separate segments of life came together in my head. Antonio was
an important part of the world I came from, Lila’s words about him diminished
the  weight  of  the  morning:  I  felt  lighter.  I  whispered  to  Nino:  Just  a  few
minutes, all right? He shrugged his shoulders and we set off toward Piazza dei
Martiri.
All  the  way,  as  we  went  along  Via  dei  Mille  and  Via  Filangieri,  Lila
monopolized me, and while Nino followed us, hands in pockets, head lowered,
certainly in a bad mood, she talked to me with her usual assurance. She said
that  at  the  first  opportunity  I  should  meet  Antonio’s  family.  She  vividly
described his wife and children. She was beautiful, fairer than I was, and the
three children were also fair, not one had taken after their father, who was as
dark as a Saracen: when the five of them walked along the stradone, the wife
and children, so pale, with those shining heads, seemed like prisoners of war
he was leading around the neighborhood. She laughed, then she listed those
who, besides Antonio, were waiting to greet me: Carmen—who, however, had
to work, she would stay a few minutes and rush off with Enzo—Alfonso, of
course, who still managed the Solaras’ shop, Marisa with the children. Give
them just a few minutes, she said, and you’ll make them happy: they love you.
While she talked, I thought that all those people I was about to see again
would spread through the neighborhood the news of the end of my marriage,
that  my  parents,  too,  would  find  out,  that  my  mother  would  learn  I  had
become the lover of the son of Sarratore. But I noticed that it didn’t bother me,
in fact it pleased me that my friends would see me with Nino, that they would
say  behind  my  back:  She’s  a  person  who  does  as  she  likes,  she’s  left  her
husband and children, she’s gone with someone else. I realized, to my surprise,
that I wanted to be officially associated with Nino, I wanted to be seen with him,
I wanted to erase the Elena-Pietro couple and replace it with the Nino-Elena
couple. And I felt suddenly calm, almost well disposed toward the net in which
Lila wished to trap me.
The words followed one another without pause; at one point, assuming an
old habit, she took me by the arm. That gesture left me indifferent. She wants
to prove that we’re still the same, I said to myself, but it’s time to acknowledge
that we’ve used each other up, that arm of hers is like a wooden limb or the
phantom  remains  of  the  thrilling  contact  of  long  ago.  I  remembered,  by
contrast, the moment when, years before, I had wished that she would get sick
and die. Then—I thought—in spite of everything our relationship was alive,
intense, therefore painful. Now there was a new fact. All the passion I was
capable of—even what had harbored that terrible wish—was concentrated on
the man I had always loved. Lila thought that she still had her old power, that
she could drag me with her where she wanted. But in the end what had she
orchestrated: the revisiting of bitter loves and adolescent passions? What a few
moments earlier had seemed to me malicious suddenly appeared as harmless
as a museum. Something else was important for me, whether she liked it or
not. Nino and I were important, Nino and I, and even to cause scandal in the
small  world  of  the  neighborhood  seemed  a  pleasing  recognition  of  us  as  a
couple. I no longer felt Lila, there was no life in her arm, it was only fabric
against fabric.
We arrived in Piazza dei Martiri. I turned to Nino to warn him that his sister
and her children were also at the shop. He muttered in irritation. The sign
appeared—SOLARA—we entered, and even though all eyes were on Nino, I was
greeted  as  if  I  were  alone.  Only  Marisa  spoke  to  her  brother,  and  neither
seemed pleased by the encounter. She immediately reproached him because
she  never  heard  from  him  or  saw  him,  exclaiming:  Mamma  is  ill,  Papa  is
unbearable,  and  you  don’t  give  a  damn.  He  didn’t  answer,  he  kissed  his
nephews absentmindedly, and only because Marisa continued to attack him he
said:  I’ve  got  my  own  troubles,  Marì,  leave  me  alone.  While  I  was  pulled
affectionately  this  way  and  that,  I  continued  to  keep  my  eye  on  him,  not
jealously now—I was worried only about his uneasiness. I didn’t know if he
remembered Antonio, if he recognized him, I alone knew about the beating my
former boyfriend had given him. I saw that they exchanged a very reserved
greeting—a movement of the head, a slight smile—no different from what right
afterward occurred between Enzo and him, Alfonso and him, Carmen and him.
For  Nino  they  were  all  strangers,  Lila’s  and  my  world,  he  had  had  almost
nothing to do with it. Afterward, he wandered through the shop smoking, and
no one, not even his sister, said a word to him. He was there, he was present, it
was he I had left my husband for. Even Lila—especially Lila—had finally to
acknowledge the fact. Now that everyone had studied him carefully, I wanted
to drag him out of there as quickly as possible and take him away with me.
10.
For the half hour that I was in that place there was a chaotic collision of past
and present: the shoes Lila designed, her wedding photograph, the evening of
the  inauguration  and  the  miscarriage,  she  who  for  her  own  purposes  had
transformed the shop into a salon and a love nest; and the present-day plot, all
of us over thirty, with our very different stories, the open rumors, the secret
ones.
I affected composure, I assumed a happy tone. I exchanged kisses, hugs, and
a few words with Gennaro, who was now an overweight boy of twelve with a
dark strip of fuzz on his upper lip, so similar in features to the adolescent
Stefano  that  Lila,  in  conceiving  him,  seemed  to  have  taken  away  herself
entirely. I felt obliged to be equally affectionate with Marisa’s children and
with Marisa herself, who, pleased with my attention, began to make allusive
remarks, the remarks of someone who knew the turn my life was taking. She
said: Now that you’ll be in Naples more often, please, come see us; we know
you two are busy, you’re scholarly people and we aren’t, but you’ll find a little
time.
She sat next to her husband and restrained her children, who were eager to
run outside. In vain I sought in her face traces of a blood tie with Nino, but she
had nothing of her brother or even of her mother. Now that she was heavier
she resembled, rather, Donato; she had also inherited his artificial patter, with
which she was trying to give me the impression that she had a lovely family
and a good life. And Alfonso, to support her, nodded yes, and smiled at me
silently, displaying gleaming white teeth. How disorienting his looks were. He
was stylishly dressed, and his long black hair, tied in a ponytail, showed off the
grace of his features, but there was something in his gestures, in his face, that I
couldn’t understand, something unexpected that made me uneasy. He was the
only one there, except for Nino and me, who had had an education, and—it
seemed  to  me—rather  than  fading  over  time  it  had  more  profoundly
penetrated his slender body, the fine contours of his face. How handsome he
was, how polite. Marisa had wanted him at all costs, even though he fled, and
now look at them, she who as she aged was taking on masculine features, he
who fought virility by becoming more feminine, and those two children of
theirs,  who  were  said  to  be  the  children  of  Michele  Solara.  Yes,  Alfonso
whispered, joining his wife’s invitation, if you would come to dinner sometime
at our house you would make us very happy. And Marisa: When will you write
a new book, Lenù? We’re waiting; but you have to keep up. You seemed dirty,
but  you  weren’t  dirty  enough—have  you  seen  the  pornographic  stuff  they
write today?
Although no one there showed any liking for Nino, there was no hint of
criticism for my change of feeling, not even a glance, or a half smile. On the
contrary, as I did my rounds, hugging and talking, they tried to impress on me
their affection and their respect. Enzo put into his embrace the force of his
seriousness, and although he merely smiled, without a word, it seemed to me
that he was saying: I love you whatever you decide to do. Carmen, instead,
drew me almost immediately into a corner—she was very nervous, and kept
looking at the clock—and spoke in a rush about her brother, as one speaks to a
good authority who knows everything and can do everything, and no false step
can dim that aura. She made no mention of her children, her husband, her
personal life or mine. I realized that she had taken upon herself the weight of
Pasquale’s reputation as a terrorist, but only in order to recast it. In our few
minutes of conversation she did not confine herself to saying that her brother
was unjustly persecuted: she wanted to restore courage and goodness to him.
Her eyes were burning with the determination to be always and no matter
what on his side. She said that she had to know where to find me, she wanted
my telephone number and my address. You are an important person, Lenù—
she whispered—you know people who, if Pasquale isn’t murdered, can help
him. Then she indicated Antonio, who was standing apart, a few steps from
Enzo. Come here—she said softly—you tell her, too. And Antonio came over,
head down, and spoke timid phrases whose meaning was: I know Pasquale
trusts you, he came to your house before making the choice he made, so if you
see him again, warn him. He has to disappear, he’d better not be seen in Italy;
because, as I told Carmen, too, the problem isn’t the carabinieri, the problem is
the Solaras. They’re convinced that he murdered Signora Manuela, and if they
find him—now, tomorrow, years from now—I can’t help him. While he was
making that speech, in a grave tone, Carmen kept interrupting to ask me: Do
you  understand,  Lenù?  She  watched  me  with  an  anxious  gaze.  Finally  she
hugged me, kissed me, whispered: You and Lina are my sisters, and she went
off with Enzo, they had things to do.
So I remained alone with Antonio. I seemed to have before me two people
present in the same body and yet very distinct. He was the boy who long ago
had held me tight at the ponds, who had idolized me, and whose intense odor
had remained in my memory like a desire that is never truly satisfied. And he
was the man of now, without an ounce of fat, all big bones and taut skin that
went  from  his  hard  blank  face  to  his  feet,  in  enormous  shoes.  I  said,
embarrassed, that I didn’t know anyone who could help Pasquale, that Carmen
overestimated me. But I realized right away that if Pasquale’s sister had an
exaggerated idea of my prestige, his was even more exaggerated. Antonio said
that I was modest as usual, that he had read my book, in German no less, that I
was known all over the world. Although he had lived for a long time abroad,
and  had  certainly  seen  and  done  terrible  things  for  the  Solaras,  he  had
remained  someone  from  the  neighborhood  and  continued  to  imagine—or
maybe he was pretending, who knows, to please me—that I had power, the
power of respectable people, because I had a degree, because I spoke in Italian,
I wrote books. I said, laughing: you’re the only person in Germany who bought
that  book.  And  I  asked  about  his  wife,  his  children.  He  answered  in
monosyllables, but meanwhile he drew me outside, into the square. There he
said kindly:
“Now you have to admit that I was right.”
“In what.”
“You wanted him, and you lied to me.”
“I was a girl.”
“No, you were grown up. And you were more intelligent than me. You don’t
know the harm you did letting me believe I was crazy.”
“Stop it.”
He was silent, I retreated toward the shop. He followed me, and held me
back on the threshold. For a few seconds he stared at Nino, who had sat down
in a corner. He murmured:
“If he hurts you, too, tell me.”
I laughed: “Of course.”
“Don’t laugh, I talked to Lina. She knows him well, she says you shouldn’t
trust him. We respect you, he doesn’t.”
Lila. Here she was using Antonio, making him her messenger of possible
misfortunes. Where had she gone? I saw that she was off in a corner, playing
with Marisa’s children, but in fact she was observing each one of us, with her
eyes narrowed. And in her usual way she was ruling over everyone: Carmen,
Alfonso, Marisa, Enzo, Antonio, her son and the children of others, perhaps
even the owners of the shop. I told myself again that she would no longer
exercise any authority over me, that that long phase was over. I said goodbye,
she hugged me tight, as if she wanted to pull me into herself. As I said goodbye
to  them  all,  one  by  one,  I  was  again  struck  by  Alfonso,  but  this  time  I
understood what had disturbed me. The little that had marked him as the son
of  Don  Achille  and  Maria,  as  the  brother  of  Stefano  and  Pinuccia,  had
disappeared from his face. Now, mysteriously, with that long hair in a ponytail,
he resembled Lila.
11.
I returned to Florence, I talked to Pietro about our separation. We quarreled
violently  while  Adele  tried  to  protect  the  children  and  perhaps  herself,
shutting herself up with them in her room. At a certain point we realized not
that we were overdoing it but that the presence of our daughters did not allow
us to overdo it as we felt the need to do. So we went out, continuing to fight in
the street. When Pietro walked off, I don’t know where—I was furious, I didn’t
want to see or hear him anymore—I went home. The children were sleeping. I
found Adele sitting in the kitchen reading.
I said: “You see how he treats me?”
“And you?”
“I?”
“Yes, you: do you see how you treat him, how you’ve treated him?”
I turned away and shut myself in the bedroom, slamming the door. The
contempt she had put into those words surprised me, wounded me. It was the
first time she had turned against me so explicitly.
I left the next day for France, full of guilt because of the children’s crying
and the books I had to study on the trip. But as I concentrated on the reading,
the pages became more and more mixed up with Nino, Pietro, my daughters,
the  defense  of  Pasquale  made  by  his  sister,  Antonio’s  words,  Alfonso’s
mutation. I arrived in Paris after an exhausting train trip, more confused than
ever. Yet at the station, when I recognized the younger of the two women
publishers on the platform, I became cheerful, I found again the pleasure of
extending myself that I had had with Nino in Montpellier. This time there were
no hotels and monumental lecture halls; everything was more modest. The two
women took me around to big cities and small towns, every day a journey,
every evening a debate in a bookstore or even in a private apartment. As for
meals and sleep, there was home cooking, a cot, or, occasionally, a couch.
I was very tired, and paid less and less attention to my appearance; I lost
weight. And yet my editors and the audiences I encountered night after night
liked me. Moving here and there, discussing with this and that person in a
language that wasn’t mine but that I rapidly learned to manage, I gradually
rediscovered an aptitude that I had displayed years before, with my previous
book:  I  had  a  natural  ability  to  transform  small  private  events  into  public
reflection.  Every  night  I  improvised  successfully,  starting  from  my  own
experience.  I  talked  about  the  world  I  came  from,  about  the  poverty  and
squalor, male and also female rages, about Carmen and her bond with her
brother,  her  justifications  for  violent  actions  that  she  would  surely  never
commit. I talked about how, since I was a girl, I had observed in my mother and
other women the most humiliating aspects of family life, of motherhood, of
subjection to males. I talked about how, for love of a man, one could be driven
to be guilty of every possible infamy toward other women, toward children. I
talked about my difficult relationship with the feminist groups in Florence and
Milan, and, as I did, an experience that I had underestimated suddenly became
important: I discovered in public what I had learned by watching that painful
effort of excavation. I talked about how, to assert myself, I had always sought
to be male in intelligence—I started off every evening saying I felt that I had
been invented by men, colonized by their imagination—and I told how I had
recently seen a male childhood friend of mine make every effort possible to
subvert himself, extracting from himself a female.
I drew often on that half hour spent in the Solaras’ shop, but I only realized
it later, maybe because Lila never came to my mind. I don’t know why I didn’t
at any point allude to our friendship. Probably it seemed to me that, although
she  had  dragged  me  into  the  swelling  sea  of  her  desires  and  those  of  our
childhood friends, she didn’t have the capacity to decipher what she had put
before my eyes. Did she see, for example, what in a flash I had seen in Alfonso?
Did she reflect on it? I ruled that out. She was mired in the lota, the filth, of the
neighborhood, she was satisfied with it. I, on the other hand, in those French
days, felt that I was at the center of chaos and yet had tools with which to
distinguish its laws. That conviction, reinforced by the small success of my
book, helped me to be somewhat less anxious about the future, as if, truly,
everything that I was capable of adding up with words written and spoken
were destined to add up in reality as well. Look, I said to myself, the couple
collapses, the family collapses, every cultural cage collapses, every possible
social-democratic accommodation collapses, and meanwhile everything tries
violently  to  assume  another  form  that  up  to  now  would  have  been
unthinkable: Nino and me, the sum of my children and his, the hegemony of
the working class, socialism and Communism, and above all the unforeseen
subject, the woman, I. Night after night, I went around recognizing myself in
an  idea  that  suggested  general  disintegration  and,  at  the  same  time,  new
composition.
Meanwhile, always somewhat breathlessly, I telephoned Adele and talked to
the children, who answered in monosyllables, or asked, over and over, like a
refrain: When are you coming home? Around Christmas, I tried to take leave of
my publishers, but by now they had taken my fate to heart, and didn’t want to
let me go. They had read my first book, they wanted to republish it, and to this
purpose they dragged me to the offices of the French publishing house that
had  printed  it  years  earlier,  unsuccessfully.  I  timidly  got  involved  in
discussions and negotiations, sustained by the two women, who, unlike me,
were very combative, and knew how to cajole and threaten. Finally, in part
thanks to the mediation of the Milan publisher, they came to an agreement:
my text would be reissued the following year under the imprint of my new
publishers.
I told Nino on the phone, and he seemed very excited. But then, sentence by
sentence, his displeasure emerged.
“Maybe you don’t need me anymore,” he said.
“What are you talkin about? I can’t wait to hold you.”
“You’re so involved in your own affairs that there’s not even a tiny spot left
for me.”
“You’re wrong. It’s thanks to you that I wrote this book, that I seem to have
everything clear in my mind.”
“Then  let’s  see  each  other  in  Naples,  or  even  in  Rome,  now,  before
Christmas.”
But by this point a meeting was impossible, the editorial matters had taken
up my time, I had to get back to the children. Yet I couldn’t resist, and we
decided to meet in Rome at least for a few hours. I traveled in a sleeping car,
and arrived in the capital exhausted on the morning of December 23rd. I spent
pointless hours in the station: Nino wasn’t there. I was worried, I was desolate.
I was about to take a train for Florence when he appeared, sweating despite the
cold. He had had endless difficulties, and had come by car, by train he would
never  have  made  it.  We  ate  something  quickly,  we  found  a  hotel  in  Via
Nazionale, close to the station, and shut ourselves in the room. I wanted to go
in the afternoon, but I didn’t have the strength to leave him, and I delayed my
departure until the next day. We woke up happy to have slept together: ah, it
was wonderful to stretch out a foot and discover, after the unconsciousness of
sleep, that he was there in the bed, beside me. It was Christmas Eve, and we
went out to get each other presents. My departure was postponed hour by
hour and so was his. Not until the late afternoon did I drag myself with my
suitcase to his car, I couldn’t leave him. Finally he started the engine, drove off,
disappeared in the traffic. Laboriously I trudged from Piazza della Repubblica
to the station, but I had delayed too long, and I missed the train by a few
minutes. I was desperate: I would arrive in Florence in the middle of the night.
And yet it had happened that way. I resigned myself to telephoning home.
Pietro answered.
“Where are you?”
“In Rome, the train is stuck here in the station and I don’t know when it’s
leaving.”
“Ah, these trains. Shall I tell the girls that you won’t be here for Christmas
Eve dinner?”
“Yes, I probably won’t arrive in time.”
He burst into laughter, he hung up.
I traveled in a totally empty, frigid train. Not even the conductor came by. I
felt as if I had lost everything and was heading toward nothingness, prisoner of
a bleakness that accentuated my guilt. I arrived in Florence in the middle of
the night, and couldn’t find a taxi. I carried my suitcase through the cold, on
the deserted streets; even the Christmas bells had long since vanished into the
night. I used my keys to enter. The apartment was dark and there was an
anguished silence. I went through the rooms, no trace of the children, or of
Adele. Tired, terrified, but also exasperated, I looked for at least a note that
would tell me where they had gone. Nothing.
The house was in perfect order.
12.
I had ugly thoughts. Maybe Dede or Elsa or both had got sick and Pietro and
his mother had taken them to the hospital. Or my husband had ended up in the
hospital, because he had done some mad thing, and Adele and the children
were with him.
I wandered through the house consumed by anxiety, I didn’t know what to
do. At some point I thought that, whatever had happened, it was likely that my
mother-in-law had told Mariarosa, and although it was three in the morning I
decided to call her. My sister-in-law answered eventually; I had a hard time
waking her. But finally I found out from her that Adele had decided to take the
children to Genoa—they had left two days earlier—to allow me and Pietro to
confront our situation freely, and Dede and Elsa to enjoy Christmas vacation in
peace.
On the one hand, the news calmed me, on the other it made me furious.
Pietro had lied to me: when I telephoned he already knew there would be no
Christmas Eve dinner, that the children weren’t expecting me, that they had
left  with  their  grandmother.  And  Adele?  How  dare  she  take  away  my
daughters! I vented on the telephone while Mariarosa listened to me in silence.
I asked: Am I wrong about everything, do I deserve what is happening to me?
She took a serious tone, but she was encouraging. She said that I had the right
to have my life and the duty to continue to study and write. Then she offered
to let me stay with her, along with the children, any time I found myself in
trouble.
Her words soothed me, yet I couldn’t sleep. I turned things over and over in
my breast: anguish, rage, desire for Nino, unhappiness because he would spend
the holiday with his family, with Albertino, and I was reduced to a woman
alone, without affection, in an empty house. At nine in the morning I heard the
door open, it was Pietro. I confronted him immediately, I yelled at him: Why
did you hand over the children to your mother without my permission? He was
disheveled, unshaven, he stank of wine, but he didn’t seem drunk. He let me
scream without reacting, he merely repeated over and over, in a depressed
tone: I have work to do, I can’t take care of them, and you have your lover, you
don’t have time for them.
I forced him to sit down, in the kitchen. I tried to calm myself, I said: “We
have to come to an agreement.”
“Explain yourself, what type of agreement.”
“The children will live with me, and you’ll see them on the weekend.”
“On the weekend where?”
“At my house.”
“And where is your house?”
“I don’t know, I’ll decide later: here, in Milan, in Naples.”
That word was enough: Naples. As soon as he heard it he jumped to his feet,
opened his eyes wide, opened his mouth as if to bite me, raised his fist with
such a ferocious expression that I was terrified. It was an endless moment. The
faucet  was  dripping,  the  refrigerator  humming,  someone  laughed  in  the
courtyard. Pietro was large, he had big white knuckles. He had already hit me
once, I knew that he would hit me now so violently that he would kill me, and I
raised my arms abruptly to protect myself. But suddenly he changed his mind,
turned, and once, twice, three times punched the metal closet where I kept the
brooms. He would have continued if I hadn’t clung to his arm crying: Stop it,
enough, you’ll hurt yourself.
The  result  of  that  rage  was  that  what  I  had  feared  on  my  return  really
happened: we ended up in the hospital. His arm was put in a cast, and on the
way home he seemed almost cheerful. I remembered that it was Christmas and
I made something to eat. We sat down at the table, and he said, point-blank:
“Yesterday I called your mother.”
I jumped.
“How did that occur to you?”
“Well, someone had to tell her. I told her what you did to me.”
“It was my job to talk to her.”
“Why? To lie to her the way you lied to me?”
I became agitated again, but I tried to contain myself; I was afraid that he
would start breaking his bones again to avoid breaking mine. Instead I saw that
he smiled calmly, looking at his arm in the cast.
“So I can’t drive,” he muttered.
“Where do you have to go?”
“To the station.”
I discovered that my mother had set out by train on Christmas Day—the day
she normally assumed domestic centrality, the highest of her responsibilities—
and was about to arrive.
13.
I was tempted to flee. I thought of going to Naples—escaping to my mother’s
city just as she was arriving in mine—and seeking some tranquility with Nino.
But I didn’t move. Although I felt that I was changed, I had remained the
disciplined person who had never avoided anything. And besides, I said to
myself, what can she do to me? I’m a woman, not a child. At most she’ll bring
something good to eat, like that Christmas ten years ago, when I was sick and
she came to see me in the dormitory at the Normale.
I went with Pietro to get my mother at the station; I drove. She got off the
train  proudly,  she  had  new  clothes,  a  new  purse,  new  shoes,  even  a  little
powder on her cheeks. You look well, I said, you’re very stylish. She hissed: No
thanks to you, and didn’t say another word to me. To make up for it she was
very affectionate toward Pietro. She asked about his cast, and since he was
vague—he said he had bumped into a door—she began to mumble in hesitant
Italian: Bumped, I know who made you bump it. I imagine, bumped.
Once we got home she ended her feigned composure. She made me a long
speech, limping back and forth in the living room. She praised my husband in
an exaggerated fashion, she ordered me to ask his forgiveness immediately.
When I didn’t, she began to beg him herself to forgive me and swore on Peppe,
Gianni, and Elisa that she would not go home if the two of us did not make
peace. At first, with all her hyperbole, she seemed to be making fun of both me
and my husband. The list she made of Pietro’s virtues appeared infinite, and—I
have to admit—she didn’t stint on mine, either. She emphasized endlessly that,
when it came to intelligence and scholarship, we were made for each other.
She urged us to think of Dede’s good—Dede was her favorite granddaughter,
she  forgot  to  mention  Elsa—the  child  understood  everything  and  it  wasn’t
right to make her suffer.
My husband, while she spoke, appeared to agree, even though he wore the
incredulous expression he assumed in the face of any spectacle of excess. She
hugged him, kissed him, thanked him for his generosity, before which—she
shouted at me—I should go down on my knees. She kept pushing us with rude
claps toward each other, so that we would hug and kiss each other. I drew
back, I was aloof. The whole time I thought: I can’t bear her, I can’t bear that at
a moment like this, in front of Pietro, I also have to account for the fact that I
am the daughter of this woman. And meanwhile I tried to calm myself by
saying: It’s her usual scene, soon she’ll get tired and go to bed. But when she
grabbed me for the hundredth time, insisting I admit that I had made a serious
mistake, I couldn’t take it anymore, her hands offended me and I pulled away. I
said  something  like:  Enough,  Ma,  it’s  pointless,  I  can’t  stay  with  Pietro
anymore, I love someone else.
It was a mistake. I knew her, she was just waiting for a small provocation.
Her  litany  broke  off,  things  changed  in  a  flash.  She  slapped  me  violently,
shouting nonstop: Shut up, you whore, shut up, shut up. And she tried to grab
me by the hair, she cried that she couldn’t stand it any longer, that it wasn’t
possible that I, I, should want to ruin my life, running after Sarratore’s son,
who was worse, much worse, than that man of shit who was his father. Once,
she cried, I thought it was your friend Lina leading you on this evil course, but I
was wrong, you, you, are the shameless one; without you, she’s become a fine
person. Damn me that I didn’t break your legs when you were a child. You have
a husband of gold who makes you a lady in this beautiful city, who loves you,
who has given you two daughters, and you repay him like this, bitch? Come
here, I gave birth to you and I’ll kill you.
She was on me, I felt as if she really wanted to kill me. In those moments I
felt all the truth of the disappointment that I was causing her, all the truth of
the maternal love that despaired of subjecting me to what she considered my
good—that is, what she had never had and what I instead had and what until
the day before had made her the most fortunate mother in the neighborhood—
and was ready to turn into hatred and destroy me to punish me for my waste of
God’s gifts. So I pushed her away, I pushed her shouting louder than she was. I
pushed her involuntarily, instinctively, with such force that I made her lose
her balance and she fell to the floor.
Pietro was frightened. I saw it in his face, in his eyes: my world colliding
with his. Certainly in all his life he had never witnessed a scene like that, words
so aggressive, reactions so frenzied. My mother had overturned a chair, she
had fallen heavily. Now she had trouble getting up, because of her bad leg, she
was waving one arm in an effort to grab the edge of the table and pull herself
up. But she didn’t stop, she went on screaming threats and insults at me. She
didn’t stop even when Pietro, shocked, helped her up with his good arm. Her
voice  choked,  angry  and  at  the  same  time  truly  grieved,  eyes  staring,  she
gasped: You’re not my child anymore, he’s my child, him, not even your father
wants you anymore, not even your siblings; Sarratore’s son is bound to stick
you with the clap and syphilis, what did I do wrong to come to a day like this,
oh God, oh God, God, I want to die this minute, I want to die now. She was so
overwhelmed by her suffering that—incredibly—she burst into tears.
I ran away and locked myself in the bedroom. I didn’t know what to do;
never would I have expected that a separation would involve such torture. I
was  frightened,  I  was  devastated.  From  what  obscure  depth,  what
presumption, had come the determination to push back my mother with her
own  physical  violence?  I  became  calmer  only  when,  after  a  while,  Pietro
knocked and said softly, with an unexpected gentleness: Don’t open the door,
I’m not asking you to let me in; I just want to say that I didn’t want this, it’s too
much, not even you deserve it.
14.
I hoped that my mother would soften, that in the morning, with one of her
abrupt swerves, she would find a way of affirming that she loved me and in
spite of everything was proud of me. But she didn’t. I heard her talking to
Pietro all night. She flattered him, she repeated bitterly that I had always been
her cross, she said, sighing, that one had to have patience with me. The next
day, to avoid quarreling again, I wandered through the house or tried to read,
without ever joining their councils. I was very unhappy. I was ashamed of the
shove  I  had  given  her,  I  was  ashamed  of  her  and  of  myself,  I  wanted  to
apologize, embrace her, but I was afraid that she would misunderstand and be
convinced that I had given in. If she had gone so far as to assert that I was the
black  soul  of  Lila,  and  not  Lila  mine,  I  must  have  been  a  truly  intolerable
disappointment to her. I said to myself, to excuse her: her unit of measure is
the neighborhood; there everything, in her eyes, is arranged for the best; she
feels related to the Solaras thanks to Elisa; her sons finally work for Marcello,
whom she proudly calls her son-in-law; in those new clothes she wears the sign
of the prosperity that has rained down on her; it’s natural therefore that Lila,
working for Michele Solara, in a stable home with Enzo, so rich she wants to
bequeath her parents the small apartment they live in, appears to her much
more successful than me. But arguments like that served only to further mark
the distance between her and me; we no longer had any point of contact.
She departed without our having spoken a word to each other. Pietro and I
took her to the station in the car, but she acted as if I were not driving. She
confined herself to wishing Pietro all the best and urging him, until a moment
before the train left, to keep her informed about his broken arm and about the
children.
As soon as she left I realized with some surprise that her irruption had had
an unhoped-for effect. My husband, as we were returning home, went beyond
the few phrases of solidarity whispered outside my door the night before. That
intemperate encounter with my mother must have revealed to him about me,
about  how  I  had  grown  up,  more  than  what  I  had  told  him  and  he  had
imagined. He felt sorry for me, I think. He returned abruptly to himself, our
relations became polite, a few days later we went to a lawyer, who talked for a
moment about this and that, then asked: “You’re sure you don’t want to live
together anymore?”
“How can one live with a person who no longer loves you?” Pietro answered.
“You, Signora, you no longer want your husband?”
“It’s my business,” I said. “All you have to do is settle the practical details of
the separation.”
When we were back on the street Pietro laughed: “You’re just like your
mother.”
“It’s not true.”
“You’re  right,  it’s  not  true:  you’re  like  your  mother  if  she  had  had  an
education and had started writing novels.”
“What do you mean?”
“I mean you’re worse.”
I was angry but not very. I was glad that within the limits of the possible he
had come to his senses. I drew a sigh of relief and began to focus on what to do.
In  the  course  of  long  phone  calls  to  Nino,  I  told  him  everything  that  had
happened  since  the  moment  we  parted,  and  we  discussed  my  moving  to
Naples; out of prudence I didn’t tell him that Pietro and I had begun to sleep
under the same roof, even if in separate rooms, naturally. Most important, I
talked to my daughters often and I told Adele, with explicit hostility, that I
would come to get them.
“Don’t worry,” my mother-in-law tried to reassure me, “you can leave them
as long as you need to.”
“Dede has school.”
“We can send her here, nearby, I would take care of everything.”
“No, I need them with me.”
“Think about it. A woman separated, with two children and your ambitions,
has to take account of reality and decide what she can give up and what she
can’t.”
Everything, in that last sentence, bothered me.
15.
I wanted to leave immediately for Genoa, but I got a phone call from France.
The older of my two publishers asked me to put into writing, for an important
journal, the arguments she had heard me make in public. So right away I found
myself  in  a  situation  in  which  I  had  to  choose  between  going  to  get  my
daughters and starting work. I put off my departure, I worked day and night
with the anxiety of doing well. I was still trying to give my text an acceptable
form when Nino announced to me that, before returning to the university, he
had some free days and was eager to see me. I couldn’t resist; we drove to
Argentario.  I  was  dazed  by  love.  We  spent  marvelous  days  devoted  to  the
winter sea and, as had never happened with either Franco or, even less, Pietro,
to the pleasure of eating and drinking, conversation, sex. Every morning at
dawn I dragged myself out of bed and began writing.
One evening, in bed, Nino gave me some pages he had written, saying that
he would value my opinion. It was a complicated essay, on Italsider in Bagnoli.
I read it lying close beside him, while now and then he murmured, self-critical:
I write badly, correct it if you want, you’re better, you were better in high
school.  I  praised  his  work  highly,  and  suggested  some  corrections.  But  he
wasn’t  satisfied,  he  urged  me  to  intervene  further.  Then,  finally,  as  if  to
convince me of the need for my corrections, he said that he had a terrible thing
to reveal to me. Half embarrassed, half ironic, he described this secret: “the
most shameful thing I’ve done in my life.” And he said that it had to do with
the  article  I  had  written  in  high  school  about  my  fight  with  the  religion
teacher, the one that he had commissioned for a student magazine.
“What did you do?” I asked, laughing.
“I’ll tell you, but remember I was just a boy.”
I felt that he was seriously ashamed and I became slightly worried. He said
that when he read my article he couldn’t believe that someone could write in
such a pleasing and intelligent way. I was content with that compliment, I
kissed him, I remembered how I had labored over those pages with Lila, and
meanwhile I described to him in a self-ironic way the disappointment, the pain
I had felt when the magazine hadn’t had space to publish it.
“I told you that?” Nino asked, uneasily.
“Maybe, I don’t remember now.”
He had an expression of dismay.
“The truth is that there was plenty of space.”
“Then why didn’t they publish it?”
“Out of envy.”
I burst out laughing.
“The editors were envious of me?”
“No,  it  was  I  who  felt  envy.  I  read  your  pages  and  threw  them  in  the
wastebasket. I couldn’t bear that you were so good.”
For a few moments I said nothing. How important that article had been to
me,  how  much  I  had  suffered.  I  couldn’t  believe  it:  was  it  possible  that
Professor Galiani’s favorite had been so envious of the lines of a middle-school
student that he threw them away? I felt that Nino was waiting for my reaction,
but I didn’t know how to place such a petty act within the radiant aura I had
given him as a girl. The seconds passed and I tried, disoriented, to keep it close
to me, so that it could not reinforce the bad reputation that, according to
Adele, Nino had in Milan, or the invitation not to trust him that had come to
me  from  Lila  and  Antonio.  Then  I  shook  myself,  the  positive  side  of  that
confession leaped to my eyes, and I embraced him. There was, in essence, no
need for him to tell me that episode, it was a bad deed that was very distant in
time. And yet he had just told me, and that need of his to be sincere, greater
than any personal gain, even at the risk of putting himself in a terrible light,
moved me. Suddenly, starting from that moment, I felt that I could always
believe him.
We loved each other that night with more passion than usual. Upon waking I
realized that, in confessing his sin, Nino had confessed that in his eyes I had
always  been  a  girl  out  of  the  ordinary,  even  when  he  was  Nadia  Galiani’s
boyfriend, even when he had become Lila’s lover. Ah, how exciting it was to
feel that I was not only loved but esteemed. He entrusted his text to me, I
helped him give it a more brilliant form. In those days in Argentario I had the
impression  that  I  had  now  definitively  expanded  my  capacity  to  feel,  to
understand,  to  express  myself,  something  that—I  thought  with  pride—was
confirmed by the modest welcome that the book I had written goaded by him,
to please him, had received outside Italy. I had everything, at that moment.
Only Dede and Elsa were left in the margins.
16.
I said nothing to my mother-in-law about Nino. I told her instead about the
French journal and portrayed myself as being fully absorbed by what I was
writing.  Meanwhile,  if  reluctantly,  I  thanked  her  for  taking  care  of  her
grandchildren.
Although I didn’t trust her, I understood at that point that Adele had raised a
real  problem.  What  could  I  do  to  keep  my  life  and  my  children  together?
Certainly I intended to go and live with Nino soon, somewhere, and in that case
we would help each other. But meanwhile? It wouldn’t be easy to balance the
need to see each other, Dede, Elsa, the writing, the public engagements, the
pressures  that  Pietro,  although  he  had  become  more  reasonable,  would
nevertheless subject me to. Not to mention the problem of money. Very little
remained of my own, and I still didn’t know how much the new book would
earn. It was out of the question that at the moment I could pay rent, telephone,
daily life for my daughters and me. And then where would our daily life take
shape? Any moment now, I would go and get the children, but to take them
where? To Florence, to the apartment where they were born and in which,
finding a gentle father, a courteous mother, they would be convinced that
everything had miraculously gone back to normal? Did I want to delude them,
knowing that as soon as Nino burst in I would disappoint them even more?
Should I tell Pietro to leave, even though I was the one who had broken with
him? Or was it up to me to leave the apartment?
I went to Genoa with a thousand questions and no decision.
My  in-laws  received  me  with  polite  coldness,  Elsa  with  uncertain
enthusiasm, Dede with hostility. I didn’t know the house in Genoa well, only an
impression of light remained in my mind. In reality there were entire rooms
full of books, old furniture, crystal chandeliers, floors covered with precious
carpets, heavy curtains. Only the living room was bright: it had a big window
that framed a section of light and sea, displaying it like a prized object. My
daughters—I  realized—moved  through  the  entire  apartment  with  more
freedom than in their own house: they touched everything, they took what
they  wanted  with  never  a  reproach,  and  they  spoke  to  the  maid  in  the
courteous but commanding tones they had learned from their grandmother. In
the first hours after I arrived they showed me their room, they wanted me to
get  excited  about  the  many  expensive  toys  that  they  would  never  have
received from me and their father, they told me about the many wonderful
things they had done and seen. I slowly realized that Dede had become very
attached to her grandfather, while Elsa, although she had hugged and kissed
me as much as she could, turned to Adele for anything she needed or, when she
was  tired,  climbed  up  on  her  lap  and  looked  at  me  from  there  with  a
melancholy gaze, her thumb in her mouth. Had the children learned to do
without me in so short a time? Or, rather, were they exhausted by what they
had seen and heard in the past months and now, apprehensive of the swarm of
disasters I conjured up, were afraid to take me back? I don’t know. Certainly I
didn’t dare to say immediately: Pack your things and let’s go. I stayed a few
days, I began to care for them again. And my in-laws never interfered; rather,
at the first recourse to their authority against mine, especially by Dede, they
withdrew, avoiding any conflict.
Guido in particular was very careful to speak about other things; at first he
didn’t even allude to the break between me and his son. After dinner, when
Dede and Elsa went to bed and he, politely, stayed with me for a while before
shutting himself in his study to work late into the night (evidently Pietro did
little more than apply his father’s model), he was embarrassed. He usually took
refuge  in  political  talk:  the  deepening  crisis  of  capitalism,  the  cure-all  of
austerity, the broadening area of marginalization, the earthquake in Friuli as
the symbol of a precarious Italy, the great difficulties of the left, old parties and
factions. But he did it without displaying any interest in my opinions, and I, in
turn, made no effort to have any. If he actually decided to encourage me to say
something, he fell back on my book, whose Italian edition I saw for the first
time  in  that  house:  it  was  a  slender  volume,  not  very  conspicuous,  which
arrived along with the many books and magazines that piled up continuously
on the tables, waiting to be perused. One evening he asked some questions, and
I—knowing  that  he  hadn’t  read  it  and  wouldn’t—summarized  for  him  the
arguments, read him a few lines. In general he listened seriously, attentive. In
one case only did he offer some learned criticisms on a passage of Sophocles
that  I  had  cited  inappropriately,  and  he  assumed  professorial  tones  that
shamed me. He was a man who emanated authority, even though authority is a
patina and at times it doesn’t take much to crack it, if only for a few minutes,
and  glimpse  a  less  edifying  person.  At  a  mention  of  feminism  Guido’s
composure suddenly shattered, an unexpected malice appeared in his eyes,
and he began to hum sarcastically, red in the face—he who in general had an
anemic complexion—a couple of slogans he had heard: Sex, sex behind the wall,
who has orgasms of us all? No one; and also: We’re not machines for reproduction but
women fighting for liberation. He sang in a low voice and laughed, all excited.
When  he  realized  that  he  had  unpleasantly  surprised  me,  he  grabbed  his
glasses, cleaned them carefully, withdrew to his study.
On those few evenings Adele was almost always silent, but I soon realized
that both she and her husband were looking for a way to draw me out into the
open. Since I wouldn’t bite, my father-in-law finally confronted the problem in
his own way. When Dede and Elsa said good night, he asked his granddaughters
in a sort of good-humored ritual: “What is the name of these two lovely young
ladies?”
“Dede.”
“Elsa.”
“And then? Grandfather wants to hear the whole name.”
“Dede Airota.”
“Elsa Airota.”
“Airota like who?”
“Like Papa.”
“And also?”
“Like Grandpa.”
“And what’s Mamma’s name?”
“Elena Greco.”
“And is your name Greco or Airota?”
“Airota.”
“Bravo. Good night, dear ones, sweet dreams.”
Then, as soon as the children left the room, accompanied by Adele, he said as
if following a thread that started from the answers of the two children: I’ve
learned that the break with Pietro is due to Nino Sarratore. I jumped, I nodded
yes. He smiled, he began to praise Nino, but not with the absolute support of
years earlier. He said that he was very intelligent, someone who knew what
was what, but—he said, emphasizing the adversative conjunction—he is fickle,
and he repeated the word as if to make sure that he had chosen the right one.
Then he emphasized: I didn’t like Sarratore’s most recent writings. And in a
suddenly  contemptuous  tone  he  relegated  him  to  the  heap  of  those  who
considered it more urgent to make the gears of neocapitalism function rather
than  to  continue  to  demand  transformations  in  social  relations  and  in
production. He used that language, but giving every word the substance of an
insult.
I couldn’t bear it. I struggled to convince him that he was wrong. Adele
returned  just  as  I  was  citing  the  essays  of  Nino’s  that  seemed  to  me  most
radical, and Guido listened to me, emitting the dull sound he usually resorted
to when he was suspended between agreement and disagreement. I suddenly
stopped, rather agitated. For a few minutes my father-in-law seemed to soften
his judgment (After all, it’s difficult for all of us to orient ourselves in the chaos of the
Italian crisis, and I can understand that young men like him find themselves in trouble,
especially when they have a desire to act), then he rose to go to his study. But
before he disappeared he had a second thought. He paused in the doorway and
uttered  harshly:  But  there  is  doing  and  doing,  Sarratore  is  intelligence  without
traditions, he would rather be liked by those in charge than fight for an idea, he’ll
become a very useful technocrat. And he broke off, but still he hesitated, as if he
had something much crueler on the tip of his tongue. He confined himself
instead to muttering good night and went into his study.
I felt Adele’s gaze on me. I ought to retreat, I thought, I have to make up an
excuse, say I’m tired. But I hoped that Adele would find a conciliating phrase
that  might  soothe  me,  and  so  I  asked:  “What  does  it  mean  that  Nino  is
intelligence without traditions?”
She looked at me ironically.
“That he’s no one. And for a person who is no one to become someone is
more important than anything else. The result is that this Signor Sarratore is
an unreliable person.”
“I, too, am an intelligence without traditions.”
She smiled.
“Yes, you are, too, and in fact you are unreliable.”
Silence. Adele had spoken serenely, as if the words had no emotional charge
but were limited to recording the facts. Still, I felt offended.
“What do you mean?”
“That I trusted a son to you and you didn’t treat him honestly. If you wanted
someone else, why did you marry him?”
“I didn’t know I wanted someone else.”
“You’re lying.”
I hesitated, I admitted: “I’m lying, yes, but why do you force me to give you a
linear explanation; linear explanations are almost always lies. You also spoke
badly of Pietro, in fact you supported me against him. Were you lying?”
“No.  I  was  really  on  your  side,  but  within  a  pact  that  you  should  have
respected.”
“What pact?”
“Remaining  with  your  husband  and  children.  You  were  an  Airota,  your
daughters were Airotas. I didn’t want you to feel unsatisfied and unhappy, I
tried to help you be a good mother and a good wife. But if the pact is broken
everything  changes.  From  me  and  from  my  husband  you’ll  have  nothing
anymore, in fact I’ll take away everything I’ve given you.”
I took a deep breath, I tried to keep my voice calm, just as she continued to
do.
“Adele,” I said, “I am Elena Greco and my daughters are my daughters. I
don’t give a damn about you Airotas.”
She nodded, pale, and her expression was now severe.
“It’s obvious that you are Elena Greco, it’s now far too obvious. But the
children are my son’s daughters and we will not allow you to ruin them.”
17.
That was the first clash with my in-laws. Others followed, though they never
reached  such  explicit  contempt.  Later  my  in-laws  confined  themselves  to
demonstrating in every possible way that, if I insisted on being concerned with
myself above all, I had to entrust Dede and Elsa to them.
I resisted, naturally: there was not a day that I didn’t get angry and decide to
take my children away with me immediately, to Florence, to Milan, to Naples—
anywhere, just so as not to leave them in that house a moment longer. But
soon I would give in, put off my departure; something always happened that
bore witness against me. Nino, for example, telephoned and, unable to refuse, I
rushed to meet him wherever he wanted. And then in Italy, too, the new book
had begun to make a small wave, and, although it was ignored by the reviewers
of the big papers, it was nevertheless finding an audience. So often I added
encounters with readers to the meetings with my lover, which extended the
time that I was away from the children.
I separated from them unwillingly. I felt their accusing gaze on me, and I
suffered. And yet already in the train, as I studied, as I prepared for some
public discussion, as I imagined my meeting with Nino, an impudent joy began
to bubble up inside me. I soon discovered that I was getting used to being
happy and unhappy at the same time, as if that were the new, inevitable law of
my  life.  When  I  returned  to  Genoa  I  felt  guilty—Dede  and  Elsa  were  now
comfortable, they had school, friends, everything they wanted, independently
of me—but as soon as I left the guilt became a tedious obstacle; it weakened. I
realized  this,  naturally,  and  the  alternation  made  me  wretched.  It  was
humiliating to have to admit that a little fame, and love for Nino, could obscure
Dede and Elsa. And yet it was so. The echo of Lila’s phrase, Think of the harm
you’re  doing  to  your  daughters,  became  in  that  period  a  sort  of  permanent
epigraph that introduced unhappiness. I traveled, I was often in a new bed,
often I couldn’t sleep. My mother’s curses returned to mind, and were mixed
up with Lila’s words. She and my friend, although they had always been, for
me, the opposite of one another, in those nights often came together. Both
were hostile, estranged from my new life: on the one hand this seemed the
proof that I had finally become an autonomous person; on the other it made
me feel alone, at the mercy of my troubles.
I tried to repair relations with my sister-in-law. As usual she showed herself
to be very willing, and organized an event in honor of my book at a bookstore
in Milan. Most of those who came were women, and I was now much criticized,
now much praised by opposing groups. At first I was frightened, but Mariarosa
interceded with authority and I discovered in myself an unsuspected capacity
to summarize disagreement and agreement, choosing in the meantime a role
as mediator. I was good at saying in a convincing way: That isn’t exactly what I
meant. In the end I was celebrated by everyone, especially by her.
Afterward I had dinner and stayed at her house. I found Franco there, I
found Silvia with her son Mirko. The whole time, all I did was observe the child
—I calculated that he must be eight—and register the physical resemblances to
Nino, and even resemblances in personality. I had never told him that I knew
about that child and had decided that I never would, but all evening I talked to
him, cuddled him, played with him, held him on my lap. In what disorder we
lived, how many fragments of ourselves were scattered, as if to live were to
explode into splinters. In Milan, there was this child, in Genoa my daughters, in
Naples  Albertino.  I  couldn’t  restrain  myself,  I  began  talking  about  that
dispersion with Silvia, with Mariarosa, with Franco, assuming the attitude of a
disillusioned thinker. In reality I expected that my former boyfriend would, as
usual,  take  over  the  conversation  and  arrange  everything  according  to  a
skillful dialectic that settled the present and anticipated the future, reassuring
us. But he was the true surprise of the evening. He spoke of the imminent end
of  a  period  that  had  been  objectively—he  used  the  adverb  sarcastically—
revolutionary but that now, he said, was declining, was sweeping away all the
categories that had served as a compass.
“I don’t think so,” I objected, but only to provoke him. “In Italy things are
very lively and combative.”
“You don’t think so because you’re pleased with yourself.”
“Not at all, I’m depressed.”
“The depressed don’t write books. People who are happy write, people who
travel, are in love, and talk and talk with the conviction that, one way or
another, their words always go to the right place.”
“Isn’t that how it is?”
“No, words rarely go to the right place, and if they do, it’s only for a very
brief  time.  Otherwise  they’re  useful  for  speaking  nonsense,  as  now.  Or  for
pretending that everything is under control.”
“Pretending? You who have always kept everything under control, you were
pretending?”
“Why not? It’s unavoidable to pretend a little. We who wanted to enact the
revolution  were  the  ones  who,  even  in  the  midst  of  chaos,  were  always
inventing an order and pretending to know exactly how things were going.”
“You’re accusing yourself?”
“Yes. Good grammar, good syntax. An explanation ready for everything. And
such great skill in logic: this derives from that and leads necessarily to that.
The game is over.”
“It doesn’t work anymore?”
“Oh,  it  works  very  well.  It’s  so  comfortable  never  to  be  confused  by
anything. No infected bedsores, no wound without its stitches, no dark room
that frightens you. Only that at a certain point the trick no longer functions.”
“Meaning what?”
“Blah blah blah, Lena, blah blah blah. The meaning is leaving the words.”
And he didn’t stop there. He mocked what he had just said, making fun of
himself and of me. Then he said: What a lot of nonsense I’m talking, and he
spent the rest of the evening listening to the three of us.
It struck me that if in Silvia the terrible marks of violence had completely
disappeared, in him the beating suffered several years earlier had gradually
exposed  another  body  and  another  spirit.  He  got  up  often  to  go  to  the
bathroom; he limped, though not conspicuously; the purple socket, in which
the false eye was clumsily set, seemed more combative than the other eye,
which, although it was alive, seemed opaque with depression. Above all, both
the  pleasantly  energetic  Franco  of  long  ago  and  the  shadowy  Franco  of
convalescence had disappeared. He seemed gently melancholy, capable of an
affectionate cynicism. While Silvia said that I should take my daughters back,
and Mariarosa said that, as long as I hadn’t found a stable arrangement, Dede
and Elsa were fine with their grandparents, Franco exaggerated his praise of
my capacities, ironically defined as male, and insisted that I should continue to
refine them without getting lost in female obligations.
When I went to my room I had trouble falling asleep. What was bad for my
children, what was their good? And bad for me, and my good, what did those
consist of, and did they correspond to or diverge from what was bad and good
for the children? That night Nino faded into the background, Lila reemerged.
Lila alone, without the support of my mother. I felt the need to argue with her,
shout at her: Don’t just criticize me, take responsibility, tell me what to do.
Finally I slept. The next day I returned to Genoa and said point-blank to Dede
and Elsa, in the presence of my in-laws:
“Girls, I have a lot of work at the moment. In a few days I have to leave again
and then again and again. Do you want to come with me or stay with your
grandparents?”
Even today as I write that question I’m ashamed.
First Dede and then, right afterward, Elsa answered:
“With Grandma and Grandpa. But come back whenever you can and bring us
presents.”
18.
It took me more than two years, filled with joys, torments, nasty surprises,
and agonizing mediations, to put some order into my life. Meanwhile, although
I  was  privately  suffering,  publicly  I  continued  to  be  successful.  The  scant
hundred  pages  I  had  written  to  make  a  good  impression  on  Nino  were
translated into German and English. My book of ten years earlier reappeared in
both France and Italy, and I began writing again for newspapers and journals.
My name and my physical person gradually reacquired their modest fame, the
days became crowded, as they had been in the past, I gained the interest, and
at times the respect, of people who at the time were well known on the public
stage. But what helped my self-confidence was some gossip from the director
of the Milan publishing house, who had liked me from the start. One evening
when I was having dinner with him to talk about my publishing future, but also
—I have to say—to propose a collection of Nino’s essays, he revealed that, the
preceding Christmas, Adele had pressured him to block the publication of my
book.
He  said,  jokingly,  “The  Airotas  are  used  to  plotting  the  rise  of  an
undersecretary at breakfast and deposing a minister at dinner, but with your
book they didn’t succeed. The volume was ready and we sent it to the printer.”
According to him, my mother-in-law was also behind the meager number of
reviews in the Italian press. As a result, if the book had nevertheless made a
name for itself, certainly the credit should go not to kind second thoughts from
Dottoressa Airota but to the force of my writing. Thus I learned that this time I
owed nothing to Adele, although she continued to tell me I did whenever I
went  to  Genoa.  That  gave  me  confidence,  made  me  proud,  I  was  finally
convinced that the period of my dependence was over.
Lila didn’t notice at all. She, from the depths of the neighborhood, from that
area  that  now  seemed  to  me  infinitesimal,  continued  to  consider  me  an
appendage of hers. From Pietro she got the telephone number in Genoa, and
she began to use it without worrying about annoying my in-laws. When she
managed to reach me she pretended not to notice my terseness and talked for
both of us, without pause. She talked about Enzo, about work, about her son,
who was doing well in school, about Carmen, about Antonio. When I wasn’t
there,  she  persisted  in  telephoning,  with  neurotic  perseverance,  enabling
Adele—who wrote in a notebook the calls that came for me, putting down, I
don’t know, such and such month, such and such day, Sarratore (three calls),
Cerullo  (nine  calls)—to  complain  about  the  nuisance  I  caused.  I  tried  to
convince Lila that if they said I wasn’t there it was pointless to insist, that the
house in Genoa wasn’t my house, and that she was embarrassing me. Useless.
She went so far as to call Nino. It’s hard to say how things really went: he was
embarrassed, he made light of it, he was afraid of saying something that would
irritate me. Early on he told me that Lila had telephoned Eleonora’s house
repeatedly, angering her, then I gathered that she had tried to get him on the
phone at Via Duomo directly, finally that he himself had hastened to track her
down  to  prevent  her  from  constantly  telephoning  his  wife.  Whatever  had
happened,  the  fact  was  that  Lila  had  forced  him  to  meet  her.  Not  alone,
however:  Nino  was  immediately  eager  to  explain  that  she  had  come  with
Carmen, since it was Carmen—mainly Carmen—who urgently needed to get in
touch with me.
I listened to the account of the meeting without emotion. First, Lila had
wanted to know in detail how I behaved in public when I talked about my
books: what dress I wore, how I did my hair and my makeup, if I was shy, if I
was entertaining, if I read, if I improvised. Otherwise she was silent, she had
left the field to Carmen. So it turned out that all that eagerness to talk to me
had to do with Pasquale. Through her own channels, Carmen had found out
that Nadia Galiani had fled to safety abroad, and so she wanted to ask a favor
again, that I get in touch with my high-school teacher to ask her if Pasquale,
too,  was  safe.  Carmen  had  exclaimed  a  couple  of  times:  I  don’t  want  the
children of the rich people to get out and not the ones like my brother. Then
she had urged him to let me know—as if she herself considered her worry
about Pasquale to be an indictable crime that could involve me, too—that if I
wanted to help her I shouldn’t use the telephone either to get in touch with the
professor or to get in touch with her. Nino concluded: Both Carmen and Lina
are imprudent, better to let it go, they can get you in trouble.
I thought that, a few months earlier, an encounter between Nino and Lila,
even  in  the  presence  of  Carmen,  would  have  alarmed  me.  Now  I  was
discovering instead that it left me indifferent. Evidently I was now so sure of
Nino’s love that, although I couldn’t rule out that she wanted to take him away
from me, it seemed impossible that she could succeed. I caressed his cheek, I
said, amused, Don’t you get into trouble, please: How is it that you never have a
free moment and now you found the time for this?
19.
I noted for the first time, during that period, the rigidity of the perimeter
that Lila had established for herself. She was less and less interested in what
happened  outside  the  neighborhood.  If  she  became  excited  by  something
whose dimensions were not merely local, it was because it concerned people
she had known since childhood. Even her work, as far as I knew, interested her
only  within  a  very  narrow  radius.  Enzo  occasionally  had  to  spend  time  in
Milan, or Turin. Not Lila, she had never moved, and I only began to notice that
closing off of herself seriously when my own taste for travel intensified.
I  took  every  possible  opportunity  to  travel  outside  of  Italy,  at  the  time,
especially if it was possible to do so with Nino. For example, when the small
German publisher who had brought out my little book organized a promotional
tour in West Germany and Austria, Nino canceled all his engagements and
acted as my cheerful and obedient driver. We travelled all over for some two
weeks,  gliding  from  one  landscape  to  the  next  as  if  beside  paintings  with
dazzling colors. Every mountain or lake or city or monument entered our life
as a couple only to become part of the pleasure of being there, at that moment,
and it always seemed like a refined contribution to our happiness. Even when
rude  reality  intervened  and  frightened  us  because  it  corresponded  to  the
darkest words that I uttered night after night in front of radical audiences, we
recounted  the  fear  to  each  other  afterward  as  if  it  had  been  a  pleasant
adventure.
One night when we were driving back to the hotel, the police stopped us.
The German language, in the dark, in the mouths of men in uniform, guns in
hand, sounded, both to my ear and to Nino’s, sinister. The police pulled us out
of the car, and separated us; I ended up, yelling, in one car, Nino in another. We
were  reunited  in  a  small  room,  left  to  ourselves,  then  brutally  questioned:
documents,  reason  for  our  stay,  job.  On  one  wall  there  was  a  long  row  of
photos: grim faces, mostly bearded, some women with short hair. I surprised
myself by looking anxiously for the faces of Pasquale and Nadia; I didn’t find
them. We were released at dawn, returned to the place where we had been
forced to leave our car. No one apologized: we had an Italian license plate, we
were Italians, the check was obligatory.
I was surprised by my instinct to seek in Germany, among the mug shots of
criminals all over the world, that of the very person who was then close to
Lila’s  heart.  Pasquale  Peluso,  that  night,  seemed  to  me  a  sort  of  rocket
launched from the narrow space in which Lila had enclosed herself to remind
me, in my much broader space, of her presence in the whirlwind of planetary
events.  For  a  few  seconds  Carmen’s  brother  became  the  point  of  contact
between her diminishing world and my expanding world.
On  the  evenings  when  I  talked  about  my  book  in  foreign  cities  I  knew
nothing about, there was a host of questions on the harshness of the political
climate, and I got by with generic phrases that in essence rotated around the
word “repress.” As a fiction writer, I felt obliged to be imaginative. No space is
spared, I said. A steamroller is moving from land to land, from West to East, to
put the whole planet in order: the workers to work, the unemployed to waste
away, the starving to perish, the intellectuals to speak nonsense, blacks to be
black, women to be women. But at times I felt the need to say something truer,
genuine, my own, and I told the story of Pasquale in all its tragic stages, from
childhood to the choice of a clandestine life. I didn’t know how to make more
concrete  speeches,  the  vocabulary  was  what  I  had  appropriated  ten  years
earlier, and I felt that the words had meaning only when I connected them to
certain facts of the neighborhood, for it was only old, worn-out material, of
certain effect. What’s more, if at the time of my first book I had sooner or later
ended by appealing to revolution, as that seemed to be the general feeling, now
I avoided the word: Nino had begun to find it naïve; from him I was learning
the complexity of politics and I was more cautious. I resorted, rather, to the
formula to rebel is just, and immediately afterward added that it was necessary
to  broaden  the  consensus,  that  the  state  would  last  longer  than  we  had
imagined, that it was urgent to learn to govern. I wasn’t always satisfied with
myself on those evenings. In some cases it seemed to me that I lowered my
tone only to make Nino happy, as he sat listening to me in smoky rooms,
among  beautiful  foreigners  who  were  my  age  or  younger.  Often  I  couldn’t
resist and I overdid it, indulging the old obscure impulse that in the past had
pushed me to argue with Pietro. It happened mainly when I had an audience of
women who had read my book and expected cutting remarks. We must be
careful not to become policemen of ourselves, I said then, the struggle is to the
last drop of blood and will end only when we win. Nino teased me afterward,
he said that I always had to exaggerate, and we laughed together.
Some nights I curled up next to him and tried to explain myself to myself. I
confessed  that  I  liked  subversive  words,  words  that  denounced  the
compromises  of  the  parties  and  the  violence  of  the  state.  Politics—I  said—
politics the way you think about it, as it certainly is, bores me, I leave it to you,
I’m not made for that sort of engagement. But then I had second thoughts and
added that I didn’t feel cut out, either, for the other sort of engagement that I
had forced myself into in the past, dragging the children along with me. The
threatening shouts of the demonstrators frightened me, as did the aggressive
fringes, the armed gangs, the dead on the streets, the revolutionary hatred of
everything. I have to speak in public, I confessed, and I don’t know what I am, I
don’t know to what point I seriously believe what I say.
Now, with Nino, I seemed able to put into words the most secret feelings,
even  things  I  didn’t  say  to  myself,  even  the  incongruities,  the  acts  of
cowardice. He was so sure of himself, solid, he had detailed opinions about
everything. I felt as if I had pasted onto the chaotic rebellion of childhood neat
cards bearing phrases suited to making a good impression. At a conference in
Bologna—we were part of a determined exodus headed to the city of freedom—
we  ran  into  constant  police  checks,  and  were  stopped  at  least  five  times.
Weapons leveled against us, out of the car, documents, there against the wall. I
was frightened, at the time, even more than in Germany: it was my land, it was
my language, I became anxious, I wanted to be silent, to obey, and instead I
began to shout, I slipped into dialect without realizing it, I unloaded insults at
the police for pushing me rudely. Fear and rage were mixed up, and often I
couldn’t control either one. Nino instead remained calm, he joked with the
policemen, humored them, calmed me. For him only the two of us counted.
Remember that we’re here, now, together, he said, the rest is background and
will change.
20.
We were always moving, in those years. We wanted to be present, observe,
study, understand, argue, bear witness, and most of all love each other. The
wailing  police  sirens,  the  checkpoints,  the  crack  of  helicopter  blades,  the
murdered—all  were  paving  stones  on  which  we  marked  the  time  of  our
relationship, the weeks, the months, the first year, and then a year and a half,
starting from the night when, in the house in Florence, I had gone to Nino in
his room. It was then that—we said to each other—our true life had begun. And
what we called true life was that impression of miraculous splendor that never
abandoned us even when everyday horrors took the stage.
We were in Rome in the days following the kidnapping of Aldo Moro. I had
joined Nino, who was to discuss a book by a Neapolitan colleague on southern
politics and geography. Very little was said about the volume, while there was
a lot of argument about Moro, the head of the Christian Democrats. Part of the
audience rose up, scaring me, when Nino said it was Moro himself who threw
mud at the state, who embodied its worst aspects, who created the conditions
for the birth of the Red Brigades, and thus obscured uncomfortable truths
about his corrupt party, and indeed identified it with the state to avoid every
accusation and every punishment. Even when he concluded that defending the
institutions meant not hiding their misdeeds but making them transparent,
without  omissions,  efficient,  capable  of  justice  in  every  nerve  center,  the
people didn’t calm down, and insults flew. I saw Nino turn pale, and I dragged
him away as soon as possible. We took refuge in us as if in shining armor.
The times had that rhythm. Things went badly for me, too, one evening, in
Ferrara. Moro’s body had been found a little more than a month earlier and I
let slip a description of his kidnappers as murderers. It was always difficult
with  words,  my  audience  required  that  I  calibrate  them  according  to  the
current usage of the radical left, and I was very careful. But often I would get
excited and then I made pronouncements with no filter. “Murderers” did not
sit well with that audience—the fascists are the murderers—and I was attacked,
criticized, jeered. I was silent. How I suffered in situations where approval
suddenly vanished: I lost confidence, I felt dragged down to my origins, I felt
politically incapable, I felt I was a woman who would have been better off not
opening  her  mouth,  and  for  a  while  I  avoided  every  occasion  of  public
confrontation. If one murders someone, is one not a murderer? The evening ended
unpleasantly,  Nino  nearly  came  to  blows  with  someone  at  the  back  of  the
room. But even in that situation only the return to the two of us counted.
That’s how it was: if we were together, there was no critic who could truly
touch us; in fact we became arrogant, nothing else made sense except our
opinions. We hurried to dinner, to good food, wine, sex. We wanted only to
hold each other, cling to each other.
21.
The first cold shower arrived at the end of 1978, from Lila, naturally. It was
the  end  of  a  series  of  unpleasant  events  that  began  in  mid-October,  when
Pietro, returning from the university, was openly attacked by a couple of kids—
reds,  blackshirts,  who  knew  anymore—armed  with  clubs.  I  hurried  to  the
hospital, convinced that I would find him more depressed than ever. Instead, in
spite of his bandaged head and a black eye, he was cheerful. He greeted me
with a conciliatory tone, then he forgot about me and talked the whole time
with some of his students, among whom a very pretty girl was conspicuous.
When most of them left, she sat next to him, on the edge of the bed, and took
one of his hands. She wore a white turtleneck sweater and a blue miniskirt, and
her brown hair hung down her back. I was polite, I asked her about her studies.
She  said  she  had  two  more  exams  before  getting  her  degree,  but  she  was
already working on her thesis, on Catullus. She’s very good, Pietro praised her.
Her name was Doriana and the whole time we were in the ward she only let go
of his hand to rearrange the pillows.
That night, in the house in Florence, my mother-in-law appeared with Dede
and Elsa. I talked to her about the girl, she smiled with satisfaction, she knew
about her son’s relationship. She said: You left him, what did you expect. The
next day we all went together to the hospital. Dede and Elsa were immediately
charmed by Doriana, by her necklaces and bracelets. They paid little attention
to either their father or me, they went out to the courtyard to play with her
and  their  grandmother.  A  new  phase  has  begun,  I  said  to  myself,  and  I
cautiously tested the ground with Pietro. Even before the beating his visits to
his daughters had decreased, and now I understood why. I asked him about the
girl. He talked about her as he knew how to do, with devotion. I asked: Will she
come to live with you? He said that it was too soon, he didn’t know, but yes,
maybe so. We have to discuss the children, I said. He agreed.
As soon as possible, I took up this new situation with Adele. She must have
thought that I wanted to complain but I explained that I wasn’t unhappy about
it, my problem was the children.
“What do you mean?” she asked, alarmed.
“Until now I’ve left them with you out of necessity and because I thought
that Pietro needed to resettle himself, but now that he has a life of his own
things have changed. I, too, have the right to some stability.”
“And so?”
“I’ll take a house in Naples and move there with my daughters.”
We had a violent quarrel. She was very attached to the girls and didn’t trust
leaving them to me. She accused me of being too self-absorbed to take care of
them  properly.  She  insinuated  that  setting  up  house  with  a  stranger—she
meant  Nino—when  you  have  two  female  children  was  a  very  serious
imprudence. Finally she swore that she would never allow her grandchildren
to grow up in a disorderly city like Naples.
We shouted insults. She brought up my mother—her son must have told her
about the terrible scene in Florence.
“When you have to go away who will you leave them with, her?”
“I’ll leave them with whoever I like.”
“I don’t want Dede and Elsa to have any contact with people who are out of
control.”
I answered:
“In all these years I believed that you were the mother figure I’d always felt
the need for. I was wrong, my mother is better than you.”
22.
I  subsequently  brought  up  the  subject  again  with  Pietro,  and  it  became
evident that, despite his protests, he would agree to whatever arrangement
allowed him to be with Doriana as much as possible. At that point I went to
Naples to talk to Nino; I didn’t want to reduce such a delicate moment to a
phone call. I stayed in the apartment on Via Duomo, as I had often done now. I
knew that he was still living there, it was his home, and although I always had
a sense of temporariness and the dirty sheets annoyed me, I was glad to see
him and I went there willingly. When I told him that I was ready to move, with
my daughters, he had a real explosion of joy. We celebrated, he promised to
find  us  an  apartment  as  soon  as  possible,  he  wanted  to  take  on  all  the
inevitable annoyances.
I was relieved. After so much running around and traveling and pain and
pleasure, it was time to settle down. Now I had some money, I would get some
from Pietro for the children’s maintenance, and I was about to sign a favorable
contract  for  a  new  book.  I  felt  that  I  was  finally  an  adult,  with  a  growing
reputation, in a state in which returning to Naples could be an exciting risk
and fruitful for my work. But mainly I wished to live with Nino. How lovely it
was to walk with him, meet his friends, talk, come home late. I wanted to find a
light-filled house, with a view of the sea. My daughters mustn’t feel the lack of
the comforts of Genoa.
I avoided calling Lila and telling her my decision. I assumed that she would
inevitably get mixed up in my affairs and I didn’t want her to. Instead I called
Carmen, with whom in the past year I had established a good relationship. To
please her I had met Nadia’s brother, Armando, who—I had discovered—was
now,  besides  a  doctor,  a  prominent  member  of  the  Proletarian  Democracy
party. He had treated me with great respect. He had praised my last book,
insisting that I come and talk about it somewhere in the city, had brought me
to  a  popular  radio  station  he  had  founded;  there,  in  the  most  wretched
disorder,  he  had  interviewed  me.  But  as  for  what  he  ironically  called  my
recurrent curiosity about his sister, he had been evasive. He said that Nadia
was well, that she had gone on a long trip with their mother, and nothing else.
About Pasquale he knew nothing nor was he interested in knowing: people like
him—he had said emphatically—had been the ruin of an extraordinary political
period.
To Carmen, obviously, I had given a toned-down report of that meeting, but
she was unhappy just the same. A decorous unhappiness, which in the end had
led me to see her occasionally when I went to Naples. I felt in her an anguish
that I understood. Pasquale was our Pasquale. We both loved him, whatever he
had done or was doing. Of him I now had a drifting, fragmentary memory: the
time we had been together at the neighborhood library, the time of the fight in
Piazza dei Martiri, the time he had come in the car to take me to Lila, the time
he had showed up at my house in Florence with Nadia. Carmen on the other
hand I felt as more consistent. Her suffering as a child—I had a clear memory of
her father’s arrest—was welded to her suffering for her brother, to the tenacity
with which she tried to watch over his fate. If she had once been only the
childhood friend who had ended up behind the counter in the Carraccis’ new
grocery store thanks to Lila, now she was a person I saw willingly and was fond
of.
We met in a coffee shop on Via Duomo. The place was dark, and we sat near
the street door. I told her in detail about my plans, I knew she would talk to
Lila and I thought: That’s as it should be. Carmen, wearing dark colors, with her
dark complexion, listened attentively and without interrupting. I felt frivolous
in my elegant outfit, talking about Nino and my desire to live in a nice house.
At a certain point she looked at the clock, announced: “Lina’s coming.”
That made me nervous; I had a date with her, not with Lila. I looked in turn
at the clock, and said, “I have to go.”
“Wait, five minutes and she’ll be here.”
She began to speak of her with affection and gratitude. Lila took care of her
friends. Lila took care of everyone: her parents, her brother, even Stefano. Lila
had helped Antonio find an apartment and had become very friendly with the
German woman he had married. Lila intended to set up her own computer
business.  Lila  was  sincere,  she  was  rich,  she  was  generous,  if  you  were  in
trouble she reached into her purse. Lila was ready to help Pasquale in any way.
Ah, she said, Lenù, how lucky you two are to have always been so close, how I
envied you. And I seemed to hear in her voice, to recognize in a movement of
her hand, the tones, the gestures of our friend. I thought again of Alfonso, I
remembered  my  impression  that  he,  a  male,  resembled  Lila  even  in  his
features. Was the neighborhood settling in her, finding its direction?
“I’m going,” I said.
“Wait a minute, Lila has something important to tell you.”
“You tell me.”
“No, it’s up to her.”
I waited, with growing reluctance. Finally Lila arrived. This time she had
paid  much  more  attention  to  her  looks  than  when  I’d  seen  her  in  Piazza
Amedeo, and I had to acknowledge that, if she wanted, she could still be very
beautiful. She exclaimed: “So you’ve decided to return to Naples.”
“Yes.”
“And you tell Carmen but not me?”
“I would have told you.”
“Do your parents know?”
“No.”
“And Elisa?”
“Not her, either.”
“Your mother’s not well.”
“What’s wrong?”
“She has a cough, but she won’t go to the doctor.”
I became restless, I turned to look at the clock.
“Carmen says you have something important to tell me.”
“It’s not a nice thing.”
“Go ahead.”
“I asked Antonio to follow Nino.”
I jumped.
“Follow in what sense?”
“See what he does.”
“Why?”
“I did it for your own good.”
“I’ll worry about my own good.”
Lila glanced at Carmen as if to get her support, then she turned back to me.
“If you act like that I’ll shut up: I don’t want you to feel offended again.”
“I’m not offended, go on.”
She looked me straight in the eye and revealed, in curt phrases, in Italian,
that Nino had never left his wife, that he continued to live with her and his
son, that as a reward he had been named, just recently, the director of an
important  research  institute  financed  by  the  bank  that  his  father-in-law
headed. She concluded gravely: “Did you know?”
I shook my head.
“No.”
“If you don’t believe me let’s go see him and I’ll repeat everything to his
face, word for word, just as I told you now.”
I waved a hand to let her know there was no need.
“I believe you,” I whispered, but to avoid her eyes I looked out the door, at
the street.
Meanwhile from very far away came Carmen’s voice saying: If you’re going
to Nino I want to come, too; the three of us will settle things properly. I felt her
lightly touching my arm to get my attention. As small girls we had read photo-
romances in the garden next to the church and had felt the same urge to help
the heroine when she was in trouble. Now, surely, she had the same feeling of
solidarity of those days, but with the gravity of today, and it was a genuine
feeling, brought on by a wrong that was not fictional but real. Lila on the other
hand had always scorned such reading and there was no doubt that at that
moment she was sitting across from me with other motives. I imagined that
she felt satisfied, as Antonio, too, must have been when he discovered Nino’s
falseness.  I  saw  that  she  and  Carmen  exchanged  a  look,  a  sort  of  mute
consultation, as if to make a decision. It was a long moment. No, I read on
Carmen’s lips, and that breath was accompanied by an imperceptible shaking
of her head.
No to what?
Lila stared at me again, her mouth half open. As usual she was taking on the
job of sticking a pin in my heart not to stop it but to make it beat harder. Her
eyes were narrowed, her broad forehead wrinkled. She waited for my reaction.
She wanted me to scream, weep, hand myself over to her. I said softly: “I really
have to go now.”
23.
I cut Lila out of everything that followed.
I was hurt, not because she had revealed that for more than two years Nino
had been telling me lies about the state of his marriage but because she had
succeeded in proving to me what in fact she had said from the start: that my
choice was mistaken, that I was stupid.
A few hours later I met Nino, but I acted as if nothing were wrong, I limited
myself only to avoiding his embraces. I was swallowed up by bitterness. I spent
the whole night with my eyes wide open, the desire to cling to that long male
body was ruined. The next day he wanted to take me to see an apartment on
Via Tasso, and I agreed when he said: If you like it, don’t worry about the rent,
I’ll take care of it, I’m about to get a position that will resolve all our financial
problems. But that night I couldn’t take it anymore and I exploded. We were in
the apartment on Via Duomo, and his friend as usual wasn’t there. I said to
him: “Tomorrow I’d like to see Eleonora.”
He looked at me in bewilderment.
“Why?”
“I have to talk to her. I want to know what she knows about us, when you
left home, when you stopped sleeping together. I want to know if you asked for
a legal separation. I want her to tell me if her father and mother know that
your marriage is over.”
He remained calm.
“Ask me: if something isn’t clear I’ll explain it to you.”
“No, I trust only her, you’re a liar.”
At that point I started yelling, I switched to dialect. He gave in immediately,
he admitted everything, I had no doubt that Lila had told me the truth. I hit
him in the chest with my fists and as I did I felt as if there were a me unglued
from me who wished to hurt him even more, who wanted to beat him, spit in
his face as I had seen people do as a child in the neighborhood quarrels, call
him a shit, scratch him, tear out his eyes. I was surprised, frightened. Am I
always this furious other I? I, here in Naples, in this filthy house, I, who if I could would
kill this man, plunge a knife into his heart with all my strength? Should I restrain this
shadow—my mother, all our female ancestors—or should I let her go? I shouted, I hit
him.  And  at  first  he  warded  off  the  blows,  pretending  to  be  amused,  then
suddenly he darkened, sat down heavily, stopped defending himself.
I slowed down, my heart was about to burst. He murmured: “Sit down.”
“No.”
“At least give me a chance to explain.”
I collapsed onto a chair, as far away as possible, and let him speak. You know
—he  began  in  a  choked  voice—that  before  Montpellier  I  had  told  Eleonora
everything and that the break was irreparable. But when he returned, he said,
things had become complicated. His wife had gone crazy, even Albertino’s life
seemed in danger. Thus, to be able to continue he had had to tell her that we
were no longer seeing each other. For a while the lie had held up. But since the
explanations  he  gave  Eleonora  for  all  his  absences  were  increasingly
implausible, the scenes had begun again. Once his wife had grabbed a knife and
tried to stab herself in the stomach. Another time she had gone out on the
balcony and wanted to jump. Yet another time she had left home, taking the
child; she had disappeared for an entire day and he was dying with fear. But
when he finally tracked her down at the house of a beloved aunt, he realized
that Eleonora had changed. She was no longer angry, there was just a hint of
contempt. One morning—Nino said, breathlessly—she asked if I had left you. I
said yes. And she said: All right, I believe you. She said it just like that and from
then on she began to pretend to believe me, pretend. Now we live in this fiction
and things are working well. In fact, as you see, I’m here with you, I sleep with
you, if I want I’ll go away with you. And she knows everything, but she behaves
as if she knew nothing.
Here  he  took  a  breath,  cleared  his  throat,  tried  to  understand  if  I  was
listening  or  harboring  only  rage.  I  continued  to  say  nothing,  I  looked  in
another direction. He must have thought that I was yielding and he continued
to explain with greater determination. He talked and talked, he was good at it,
he put everything into it. He was winning, self-mocking, suffering, desperate.
But when he tried to approach, I pushed him away, shouting. Then he couldn’t
bear  it  and  burst  into  tears.  He  gesticulated,  he  leaned  toward  me,  he
murmured between tears: I don’t want you to pardon me, I want only to be
understood. I interrupted him, angrier than ever, I cried: You lied to her and
you lied to me, and you didn’t do it for love of either of us, you did it for
yourself, because you don’t have the courage of your choices, because you’re a
coward. Then I moved on to repugnant words in dialect, and he let himself be
insulted, he muttered just some phrases of regret. I felt as if I were suffocating,
I gasped, I was silent, and that allowed him to return to the charge. He tried
again  to  demonstrate  that  lying  to  me  had  been  the  only  way  to  avoid  a
tragedy. When it seemed to him that he had succeeded, when he whispered to
me that now, thanks to Eleonora’s acquiescence, we could try to live together
without trouble, I said calmly that it was over between us. I left, I returned to
Genoa.
24.
The  atmosphere  in  my  in-laws’  house  became  increasingly  tense.  Nino
telephoned constantly, I either hung up on him or quarreled too loudly. A
couple of times Lila called, she wanted to know how it was going. I said to her:
Well,  very  well,  just  the  way  you  wanted  it  to  go,  and  hung  up.  I  became
intractable, I yelled at Dede and Elsa for no reason. But mainly I began to fight
with Adele. One morning I threw in her face what she had done to hinder the
publication of my book. She didn’t deny it, in fact she said: It’s a pamphlet, it
doesn’t have the dignity of a book. I replied: If I write pamphlets, you in your
whole life haven’t been capable of writing even that, and it’s not clear where
all this authority of yours comes from. She was offended, she hissed: You don’t
know anything about me. Oh no, I knew things that she couldn’t imagine. That
time I managed to keep my mouth shut, but a few days later I had a violent
quarrel with Nino; I yelled on the phone in dialect, and when my mother-in-
law reproached me in a contemptuous tone I reacted by saying: “Leave me
alone, worry about yourself.”
“What do you mean?”
“You know.”
“I don’t know anything.”
“Pietro told me that you’ve had lovers.”
“I?”
“Yes, you, don’t be so taken aback. I assumed my responsibilities in front of
everyone, even Dede and Elsa, and I’m paying for the consequences of my
actions. You, who give yourself so many airs, you’re just a hypocritical little
bourgeois who hides her dirt under the carpet.”
Adele turned pale, she was speechless. Rigid, her face tense, she got up and
closed the door of the living room. Then she said to me in a low voice, almost a
whisper, that I was an evil woman, that I couldn’t understand what it meant to
truly  love  and  to  give  up  one’s  beloved,  that  behind  a  pleasing  and  docile
façade  I  concealed  an  extremely  vulgar  craving  to  grab  everything,  which
neither studying nor books could ever tame. Then she concluded: Tomorrow
get out, you and your children; I’m sorry only that if the girls had grown up
here they might have tried not to be like you.
I didn’t answer, I knew I had gone too far. I was tempted to apologize but I
didn’t. The next morning Adele ordered the maid to help me pack. I’ll do it
myself, I exclaimed, and without even saying goodbye to Guido, who was in his
study pretending nothing was happening, I found myself at the station loaded
with suitcases, the two children watching me, trying to understand what my
intentions were.
I remember the exhaustion, the echo of the station hall, the waiting room.
Dede reproached me for shoving: Don’t push me, don’t always shout, I’m not
deaf. Elsa asked: Are we going to Papa? They were cheerful because there was
no school, but I felt that they didn’t trust me and they asked cautiously, ready
to be silent if I got angry: What are we doing, when are we going back to
Grandma  and  Grandpa’s,  where  are  we  going  to  eat,  where  will  we  sleep
tonight.
At first, desperate as I was, I thought of going to Naples and showing up with
the children, without warning, at Nino and Eleonora’s house. I said to myself:
Yes, that’s what I should do, my daughters and I are in this situation because of
him, and he has to pay. I wanted my disorder to crash into him and overwhelm
him, as it was overwhelming me. He had deceived me. He had held on to his
family and, like a toy, me, too. I had chosen definitively, he hadn’t. I had left
Pietro, he had kept Eleonora. I was in the right, then. I had the right to invade
his life and say to him: Well, my dear, we are here; if you’re worried about your
wife because she does crazy things, now I’m doing crazy things, let’s see how
you manage it.
But  while  I  was  preparing  for  a  long,  excruciating  journey  to  Naples  I
changed  my  mind  in  a  flash—an  announcement  on  the  loudspeaker  was
enough—and left for Milan. In this new situation I needed money more than
ever. I said to myself that first of all I should go to a publisher and beg for work.
Only on the train did I realize the reason for that abrupt change of plan. In
spite of everything, love writhed fiercely inside me and the mere idea of doing
harm to Nino was repugnant to me. Although I now wrote about women’s
autonomy and discussed it everywhere, I didn’t know how to live without his
body, his voice, his intelligence. It was terrible to confess it, but I still wanted
him, I loved him more than my own daughters. At the idea of hurting him and
of no longer seeing him I withered painfully, the free and educated woman lost
her petals, separated from the woman-mother, and the woman-mother was
disconnected from the woman-lover, and the woman-lover from the furious
whore, and we all seemed on the point of flying off in different directions. As I
traveled toward Milan, I discovered that, with Lila set aside, I didn’t know how
to give myself substance except by modeling myself on Nino. I was incapable of
being a model for myself. Without him I no longer had a nucleus from which to
expand outside the neighborhood and through the world, I was a pile of debris.
I arrived worn out and frightened at Mariarosa’s house.
25.
How long did I stay there? Several months, and at times it was a difficult
cohabitation. My sister-in-law already knew about the fight with Adele and she
said with her usual frankness: You know I love you, but you were wrong to
treat my mother like that.
“She behaved very badly.”
“Now. But she helped you before.”
“She did it only so that her son wouldn’t look bad.”
“You’re unfair.”
“No, I’m direct.”
She looked at me with an irritation that was unusual in her. Then, as if she
were stating a rule whose violation she could not tolerate, she said: “I want to
be direct, too. My mother is my mother. Say what you like about my father and
my brother, but leave her alone.”
Otherwise she was polite. She welcomed us to her house in her casual way,
assigned us a big room with three cots, gave us towels, and then left us to
ourselves, as she did with all the guests who appeared and disappeared in the
apartment. I was struck, as usual, by her vivacious gaze; her entire organism
seemed to hang from her eyes like a worn dressing gown. I scarcely noticed
that she had an unusual pallor and had lost weight. I was absorbed in myself, in
my suffering, and soon I paid her no attention at all.
I tried to put some order into the room, which was dusty, dirty, crowded
with things. I made my bed and the girls’ beds. I made a list of everything they
and I needed. But that organizational effort didn’t last long. My head was in the
clouds, I didn’t know what decisions to make, and for the first days I was
constantly on the telephone. I missed Nino so much that I immediately called
him. He got Mariarosa’s number and from then on he called me continuously,
even if every conversation ended in a fight. At first I was overjoyed to hear his
voice, and at times I was close to giving in. I said to myself: I hid from him the
fact that Pietro returned home and we were sleeping under the same roof.
Then I grew angry with myself, I realized that it wasn’t the same thing: I had
never slept with Pietro, he slept with Eleonora; I had started the process of
separation, he had consolidated his marriage bond. So we started quarreling
again,  I  told  him,  shouting,  never  to  call  again.  But  the  telephone  rang
regularly morning and evening. He said that he couldn’t do without me, he
begged me to come to Naples. One day he announced that he had rented the
apartment on Via Tasso and that everything was ready to welcome me and my
daughters.  He  said,  he  declared,  he  promised,  he  appeared  ready  for
everything, but he could never make up his mind to say the most important
words: It’s really over now with Eleonora. So there was always a moment when,
paying no attention to the children or to the people coming and going around
the house, I screamed at him to stop tormenting me and hung up angrier than
ever.
26.
I lived those days despising myself, I couldn’t tear Nino out of my mind. I
finished my work lethargically, I departed out of duty, I returned out of duty, I
despaired, I was collapsing. And I felt that the facts were proving Lila right: I
was forgetting my daughters, I was leaving them with no care, with no school.
Dede and Elsa were enchanted by the new arrangement. They scarcely knew
their aunt, but they adored the sense of absolute freedom that she radiated.
The  house  in  Sant’Ambrogio  continued  to  be  a  port  in  a  storm;  Mariarosa
welcomed  everyone  with  the  tone  of  a  sister  or  perhaps  a  nun  without
prejudices, and she didn’t care about dirt, mental problems, crime, drugs. The
girls  had  no  duties;  they  wandered  through  the  rooms  until  late  at  night,
curious.  They  listened  to  speeches  and  jargons  of  every  type,  they  were
entertained when people made music, when they sang and danced. Their aunt
went out in the morning to the university and returned in the late afternoon.
She was never anxious, she made them laugh, she chased them around the
apartment, played hide-and-seek or blind-man’s buff. If she stayed home, she
undertook great cleaning efforts, involving me, them, stray guests. But more
than  our  bodies  she  looked  after  our  minds.  She  had  organized  evening
courses, and invited her colleagues from the university. Sometimes she herself
gave lectures that were witty and packed with information, and she kept her
nieces beside her, addressing them, involving them. The apartment at those
times was crowded with her friends, men and women, who came just to listen
to her.
One evening, during one of those lessons, there was a knock on the door and
Dede ran to open it; she liked to greet people. Returning to the living room, she
said excitedly: It’s the police. In the small assembly there was an angry, almost
threatening murmur. Mariarosa rose calmly and went to speak to the police.
There were two, they said that the neighbors had complained, or something
like that. She was cordial, insisted that they come in, almost forced them to sit
with us in the living room, and returned to her lecture. Dede had never seen a
policeman up close, and started talking to the younger one, resting her elbow
on his knee. I remember her opening remark, by which she intended to explain
that Mariarosa was a good person:
“In fact,” she said, “my aunt is a professor.”
“In fact,” the cop said faintly, with an uncertain smile.
“Yes.”
“How well you speak.”
“Thank  you.  In  fact,  her  name  is  Mariarosa  Airota  and  she  teaches  art
history.”
The  boy  whispered  something  to  his  older  companion.  They  remained
prisoners for ten minutes or so and then they left. Dede led them to the door.
Later  I,  too,  was  assigned  one  of  these  educational  projects,  and  for  my
evening more people showed up than usual. My daughters sat on cushions in
the first row, in the big living room, and they listened obediently. Starting
then, I think, Dede began to observe me with curiosity. She had great respect
for her father, her grandfather, and now Mariarosa. She knew nothing about
me and didn’t want to know anything. I was her mother, I forbade everything,
she couldn’t stand me. She must have been amazed that I was listened to with
an attention that she on principle would never have given me. And maybe she
also liked the composure with which I responded to criticisms; that evening
they  came  surprisingly  from  Mariarosa.  My  sister-in-law  was  the  only  one
among the women present who did not agree with even a word of what I was
saying—she who, long ago, had encouraged me to study, to write, to publish.
Without asking my permission, she told the story of the fight I had had with
my  mother  in  Florence,  demonstrating  that  she  knew  about  it  in  detail.
“Resorting to many learned citations,” she theorized that a woman without
love for her origins is lost.
27.
When  I  had  to  travel  I  left  the  children  to  my  sister-in-law,  but  I  soon
realized that it was really Franco who took care of them. Generally he stayed in
his room, he didn’t join in the lectures, he paid no attention to the constant
coming  and  going.  But  he  was  fond  of  my  daughters.  When  necessary  he
cooked for them, he invented games, in his way he instructed them. Dede
learned from him to challenge the silly fable—so she described it, telling me
about it—of Menenius Agrippa, which she had been taught in the new school I
had  decided  to  enroll  her  in.  She  laughed  and  said:  The  patrician  Menenius
Agrippa, Mamma, bewildered the common people with his talk, but he couldn’t prove
that one man’s limbs are nourished when another man’s stomach is filled. Ha ha ha.
From  him  she  also  learned,  on  a  big  map  of  the  world,  the  geography  of
inordinate prosperity and intolerable poverty. She couldn’t stop repeating: It’s
the greatest injustice.
One evening when Mariarosa wasn’t there, my boyfriend from the days of
Pisa said, in a serious tone of regret, alluding to the children, who followed him
around the house with drawn-out cries: Imagine, they could have been ours. I
corrected him: They’d be a few years older by now. He nodded yes. I observed
him for a few seconds while he stared at his shoes. I compared him in my mind
to the rich, educated student of fifteen years earlier: it was him and yet it was
not  him.  He  no  longer  read,  he  didn’t  write,  within  the  past  year  he  had
reduced  to  the  minimum  his  participation  in  assemblies,  debates,
demonstrations. He talked about politics—his only true interest—without his
former conviction and passion; rather, he accentuated the tendency to mock
his  own  grim  prophecies  of  disaster.  In  hyperbolic  tones  he  listed  the
catastrophes  that  in  his  view  were  approaching:  one,  the  decline  of  the
revolutionary  subject  par  excellence,  the  working  class;  two,  the  definitive
dispersion of the political patrimony of socialists and Communists, who were
already perverted by their daily quarrel over which was playing the role of
capital’s crutch; three, the end of every hypothesis of change, what was there
was there and we would have to adapt to it. I asked skeptically: You really
think it’s going to end like that? Of course—he laughed—but you know that I’m
a  skilled  debater,  and  if  you  want  I’ll  prove  to  you,  by  means  of  thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis, the exact opposite: Communism is inevitable, the
dictatorship of the proletariat is the highest form of democracy, the Soviet
Union and China and North Korea and Thailand are much better than the
United States, shedding blood in rivulets or rivers in certain cases is a crime
and in certain others is just. Would you prefer that I do that?
Only twice did I see him as he had been as a youth. One morning Pietro
appeared, without Doriana, assuming the attitude of someone who was making
an inspection to check on what conditions his daughters were living in, what
school I had put them in, if they were happy. It was a moment of great tension.
The children perhaps told him too much, and with a childish taste for fantastic
exaggeration,  about  the  way  they  were  living.  So  he  began  to  quarrel
ponderously first with his sister and then with me, he said to us both that we
were irresponsible. I lost my temper, and shouted at him: You’re right, take
them away, you take care of them, you and Doriana. And at that point Franco
came out of his room, intervened, rolled out his old skill with words, which in
the past had enabled him to control raucous meetings. He and Pietro ended up
having a learned discussion on the couple, the family, the care of children, and
even  Plato,  forgetting  about  Mariarosa  and  me.  My  husband  left,  his  face
flushed, his eyes clear, nervous and yet pleased to have found someone with
whom he could have an intelligent and civilized conversation.
Stormier—and terrible for me—was the day when Nino appeared without
warning. He was tired from the long drive, unkempt in appearance, very tense.
At first I thought he had come to decide, on his own authority, the fate of me
and the children. Enough, I hoped he would say, I’ve cleared up my situation
and we’re going to live in Naples. I felt disposed to give in without any more
nonsense, I was exhausted by the provisional nature of things. But it didn’t
turn  out  like  that.  We  closed  ourselves  in  a  room,  and  he,  amid  endless
hesitations,  twisting  his  hands,  his  hair,  his  face,  repeated,  against  all  my
expectations, that it was impossible for him to separate from his wife. He was
agitated, he tried to embrace me, he struggled to explain that only by staying
with Eleonora would it be possible for him not to give up me and our life
together. At another moment I would have pitied him; it was evident that his
suffering was sincere. But, at the time, I didn’t care in the least how much he
was suffering, I looked at him in astonishment.
“What are you saying to me?”
“That I can’t leave Eleonora, but I can’t live without you.”
“So  if  I  understand  you:  you  are  proposing,  as  if  it  were  a  reasonable
solution, that I abandon the role of lover and accept that of parallel wife.”
“What do you mean, it’s not like that.”
I attacked him, Of course it’s like that, and I pointed to the door: I was tired of
his tricks, his inspired ideas, his every wretched word. Then, in a voice that
strained to come out of his throat, and yet with the air of someone who is
uttering definitively the irrefutable reasons for his own behavior, he confessed
to me a thing that—he cried—he didn’t want others to tell me, and so he had come
to tell me in person: Eleonora was seven months pregnant.
28.
Now that much of my life is behind me I know that my reaction to that news
was overblown, and as I write I realize that I’m smiling to myself. I know many
men and many women who can recount experiences that aren’t very different:
love and sex are unreasonable and brutal. But at the time I couldn’t bear it.
That fact—Eleonora is seven months pregnant—seemed to me the most intolerable
wrong  that  Nino  could  do  to  me.  I  remembered  Lila,  the  moment  of
uncertainty when she and Carmen had looked at each other, as if they had had
something else to tell me. Had Antonio discovered the pregnancy, too? Did
they know? And why had Lila relinquished her chance to tell me? Had she
claimed the right to measure out my suffering in doses? Something broke in
my chest and in my stomach. While Nino was suffocating with anxiety and
struggling to justify himself, saying that the pregnancy, if on the one hand it
had served to calm his wife, on the other had made it even more difficult to
leave her, I was doubled over with suffering, arms locked, my whole body was
ill, I couldn’t speak, or cry out. Only Franco was in the apartment. No crazy
women,  desolate  women,  singers,  sick  people.  Mariarosa  had  taken  the
children out to give Nino and me time to confront each other. I opened the
door of the room and called my old boyfriend from Pisa in a weak voice. He
came right away and I pointed to Nino. I said in a sort of rattle: throw him out.
He didn’t throw him out, but he signaled him to be silent. He avoided asking
what had happened, he grabbed my wrists, he held me steady, he let me retake
possession of myself. Then he led me to the kitchen, made me sit down. Nino
followed  us.  I  was  gasping  for  breath,  making  choking  sounds  of  despair.
Throw him out, I repeated, when Nino tried to come near me. Franco kept him
away, said calmly: Leave her alone, leave the room. Nino obeyed and I told
Franco everything in the most confused way. He listened without interrupting,
until he realized that I had no more energy. Only at that point did he say, in his
refined way, that it was a good rule not to expect the ideal but to enjoy what is
possible. I got mad at him, too: The usual male talk, I shouted, who gives a
damn  about  the  possible,  you’re  talking  nonsense.  He  wasn’t  offended,  he
wanted me to examine the situation for what it was. All right, he said, this man
has lied to you for two and a half years, he told you he had left his wife, he said
he didn’t have relations with her, and now you discover that seven months ago
he made her pregnant. You’re right, it’s horrible, Nino is an abject being. But
once  it  was  known—he  pointed  out—he  could  have  disappeared,  forgotten
about you. Why, then, did he drive from Naples to Milan, why did he travel all
night, why did he humiliate himself, accusing himself, why did he beg you not
to leave him? All that should signify something. It signifies, I cried, that he is a
liar, that he is a superficial person, that he is incapable of making a choice. And
he kept nodding yes, he agreed. But then he asked: What if he loved you,
seriously, and yet knew that he could love you only in this way?
I didn’t have time to say that that was exactly Nino’s argument. The house
door  opened  and  Mariarosa  appeared.  The  girls  recognized  Nino  with
charming  bashfulness  and  at  the  idea  of  getting  his  attention  immediately
forgot  that  that  name  had  for  days,  for  months,  sounded  in  their  father’s
mouth like a curse. He devoted himself to them, Mariarosa and Franco took
care of me. How difficult everything was. Dede and Elsa were now talking in
loud voices, laughing, and my two hosts turned to me with serious arguments.
They wanted to help me reason, but with underlying feelings that not even
they could keep under control. Franco revealed a surprising tendency to give
space to affectionate mediation instead of to clean breaks, as he used to do. My
sister-in-law at first was full of understanding for me, then she also tried to
understand  Nino’s  motives  and,  especially,  Eleonora’s  plight,  in  the  end
wounding me, maybe without wishing to, maybe intentionally. Don’t get angry,
she said, try to reflect: what does a woman of your understanding feel at the
idea that her happiness becomes the ruin of someone else?
It went on like that. Franco urged me to take what I could within the limits
imposed  by  the  situation,  Mariarosa  portrayed  Eleonora  abandoned  with  a
small child and another on the way, and advised me: establish a relationship
with her, look at one another. The nonsense of someone who doesn’t know, I
thought, with no energy now, of someone who can’t understand. Lila would
come out of it as she always does, Lila would advise me: You’ve already made a
big enough mistake, spit in their faces and get out, it was the ending she’d
always wished for. But I was frightened, I felt even more confused by what
Franco  and  Mariarosa  were  saying,  I  was  no  longer  listening  to  them.  I
observed Nino instead. How handsome he was as he regained my daughters’
trust. Here, he was coming back into the room with them, pretending nothing
had  happened,  praising  them  as  he  addressed  Mariarosa—See,  aunt,  what
exceptional young ladies?—and the charm came naturally to him, the light
touch of his fingers on her bare knee. I dragged him out of the house, insisted
on a long walk through Sant’Ambrogio.
It was hot, I remember. We drifted alongside a red brick stain, the air was
full of fuzz flying off the plane trees. I told him that I had to get used to doing
without him, but that for now I couldn’t, I needed time. He answered that he,
instead, would never be able to live without me. I replied that he had never
been able to separate himself from anything or anyone. He repeated that it
wasn’t  true,  that  circumstances  were  to  blame,  that  to  have  me  he  was
compelled  to  hold  on  to  everything.  I  understood  that  to  force  him  to  go
beyond that position was in vain, he could see before him only an abyss and he
was frightened by it. I walked him to his car, I sent him away. A moment before
he left he asked: What do you think you’ll do. I didn’t answer, even I didn’t
know.
29.
What happened a few weeks later made my decision for me. Mariarosa had
gone, she had an engagement in Bordeaux. Before she left she took me aside
and delivered a confused speech about Franco, on the need for me to stay close
to  him  during  her  absence.  She  described  him  as  very  depressed,  and  I
suddenly understood what until that moment I had only intuited in fits and
starts and then missed through distraction: with Franco she was playing the
good Samaritan as she did with everyone; she loved him seriously, she had
become  for  him  mother-sister-lover,  and  her  expression  of  suffering,  her
withered body were due to permanent anxiety about him, the certainty that he
had become too fragile and might break at any moment.
She was away for eight days. With some effort—I had other things on my
mind—I was cordial to Franco. I stayed up late talking with him every evening,
and I was glad that instead of talking about politics he preferred to recall, to
himself more than to me, how well we had got on together: our walks through
Pisa in the spring, the terrible smell of the street along the Arno, the times he
had confided to me things he’d never said to anyone about his childhood, his
parents, his grandparents. Above all I was pleased that he let me talk about my
anxieties,  about  the  new  contract  I  had  signed  with  the  publishing  house,
about  the  need  therefore  to  write  a  new  book,  about  a  possible  return  to
Naples, about Nino. He never attempted generalizations or superfluous words.
He  was,  rather,  sharp,  almost  vulgar.  If  he  is  more  important  to  you  than
yourself—he said one evening, seeming almost dazed—you should take him as
he is: wife, children, that permanent tendency to sleep with other women, the
vulgar  things  he  is  and  will  be  capable  of.  Lena,  Lenuccia,  he  murmured,
affectionately, shaking his head. And then he laughed, got up from the chair,
said obscurely that in his view love ended only when it was possible to return
to oneself without fear or disgust, and left the room with shuffling steps, as if
he wanted to reassure himself of the materiality of the floor. I don’t know why
Pasquale  came  to  mind,  that  night,  a  person  very  far  from  him  in  social
background, culture, political choices. And yet, for an instant, I imagined that
if my friend from the neighborhood had managed to reemerge alive from the
darkness that had swallowed him he would have the same way of walking.
For an entire day Franco didn’t come out of his room. That night I had an
engagement for work, I knocked, I asked him if he could give Dede and Elsa
dinner. He promised to do it. I got home late, and, contrary to his usual habit,
he had left the kitchen in great disorder. I cleared the table, I washed the
dishes. I didn’t sleep much, at six I was already awake. On the way to the
bathroom I passed his room and was attracted by a sheet of notebook paper
attached to the door with a thumbtack. On it was written: Lena, don’t let the
children in. I thought that Dede and Elsa had been bothering him, or that the
evening before they had made him angry, and I went to make breakfast with
the  intention  of  scolding  them.  Then  I  thought  again.  Franco  had  a  good
relationship with my daughters, I ruled out that he was angry with them for
some reason. Around eight I knocked discreetly. No answer. I knocked harder, I
opened the door cautiously, the room was dark. I called him, silence, I turned
on the light.
There was blood on the pillow and on the sheet, a large blackish stain that
extended to his feet. Death is so repellent. Here I will say only that when I saw
that body deprived of life, that body which I knew intimately, which had been
happy and active, which had read so many books and had been exposed to so
many experiences, I felt both repulsion and pity. Franco had been a living
material saturated with political culture, with generous purposes and hopes,
with good manners. Now he offered a horrible spectacle of himself. He had rid
himself so fiercely of memory, language, the capacity to find meaning that it
seemed obvious the hatred he had for himself, for his own skin, for his moods,
for  his  thoughts  and  words,  for  the  brutal  corner  of  the  world  that  had
enveloped him.
In  the  days  that  followed  I  thought  of  Pasquale  and  Carmen’s  mother,
Giuseppina.  She,  too,  had  stopped  being  able  to  tolerate  herself  and  the
segment of life that remained to her. But Giuseppina came from the time that
preceded me, Franco instead was of my time, and that violent removal from it
didn’t just make an impression, it was devastating. I thought for a long time
about his note, the only one he left. It was addressed to me and in substance
was saying: Don’t let the children in, I don’t want them to see me; but you can
enter, you must see me. I still think about that double imperative, one explicit,
one implicit. After the funeral, which was attended by a crowd of militants
with weakly clenched fists (Franco was still at the time well known and highly
respected), I tried to re-establish a bond with Mariarosa. I wanted to be close to
her,  I  wanted  to  talk  about  him,  but  she  wouldn’t  let  me.  Her  untidy
appearance got worse, her features took on a morbid distrust that diminished
even the vivacity of her eyes. The house slowly emptied. Any sisterly feeling
toward me vanished, and she became increasingly hostile. Either she stayed at
the university all the time or, if she was at home, she shut herself in her room
and didn’t want to be disturbed. She got angry if the girls made noise playing,
she got even angrier if I scolded them for their noisy games. I packed the bags,
I left for Naples with Dede and Elsa.
30.
Nino had been sincere, he had actually rented the apartment on Via Tasso. I
went to live there right away, even though it was infested with ants and the
furniture  came  down  to  a  double  bed  without  a  headboard,  cots  for  the
children, a table, some chairs. I didn’t talk about love, I didn’t mention the
future.
I told him that my decision had to do mostly with Franco, and I limited
myself to bringing him good news and bad. The good was that my publisher
had agreed to bring out his collection of essays, provided he made a new draft
that was a little less dry; the bad was that I didn’t want him to touch me. He
greeted the first piece of news joyfully, he was desperate about the second. But
then, as it turned out, we spent every evening sitting together, rewriting his
essays, and with that closeness I couldn’t keep my rage alive. Eleonora was still
pregnant when we began to love each other again. And when she gave birth to
a girl, who was named Lidia, Nino and I had returned to being lovers, a couple
with our habits, a nice house, two children, an intense life, both private and
public.
“Don’t think,” I said from the start, “that I’m at your command: I’m not
capable of leaving you now, but sooner or later it will happen.”
“It won’t happen, you won’t have any reason to.”
“I have plenty of reasons.”
“Everything will change soon.”
“We’ll see.”
But  it  was  a  stage  set,  I  passed  off  as  very  reasonable  what  was  in  fact
unreasonable and humiliating. I’m taking—I said, adapting Franco’s words—
what is indispensable to me now, and as soon as I’ve consumed his face, his
words, every desire, I’ll send him away. When I waited for him in vain for days I
told myself it was better that way, I was busy, he was with me too much. And
when I felt the sting of jealousy I tried to calm myself by whispering: I am the
woman he loves. And if I thought of his children I said to myself: He spends
more time with Dede and Elsa than with Albertino and Lidia. Naturally it was
all true and all false. Yes, the force of Nino’s attraction would wear out. Yes, I
had a lot of things to do. Yes, Nino loved me, he loved Dede and Elsa. But there
were also others, yes, whom I pretended to ignore. Yes, I was more attracted to
him  than  ever.  Yes,  I  was  ready  to  neglect  everything  and  everyone  if  he
needed me. Yes, his ties to Eleonora, Albertino, and the newborn Lidia were at
least as strong as his ties to me and my daughters. I lowered dark curtains over
those yeses, and if in fact here or there a tear in the fabric made evident the
true state of things I quickly resorted to big words about the world to come:
everything is changing, we are inventing new forms of living together, and
other nonsense of the sort that I myself uttered in public or wrote every time it
happened.
But  the  difficulties  hammered  at  me  every  day,  cracks  were  continually
opening  up.  The  city  hadn’t  improved  at  all,  its  malaise  wore  me  out
immediately. Via Tasso turned out to be inconvenient. Nino got me a used car,
a white Renault 4 that I immediately became attached to, but then I was always
stuck in traffic, and I soon gave it up. I struggled to meet the endless demands
of daily life much more than I ever had in Florence, Genoa, Milan. From the
first day of school Dede hated her teacher and her classmates. Elsa, now in first
grade, always came home depressed, her eyes red, and refused to tell me what
had happened to her. I began to scold them both. I said they didn’t know how
to deal with adversity, they didn’t know how to assert themselves, they didn’t
know how to adapt, and they had to learn. As a result the two sisters joined
forces against me: they began to speak of their grandmother Adele and aunt
Mariarosa as if they were divinities who had organized a happy world made
just for them, they mourned them in an increasingly explicit way. When, in an
attempt to win them back, I drew them to me, cuddled them, they hugged me
unwillingly, and sometimes pushed me away. And my work? It became more
and more evident that, especially in that successful period, I would have done
better to stay in Milan and find a job at a publisher’s. Or even settle in Rome,
since I had met people on my promotional tours who had offered to help me.
What were my daughters and I doing in Naples? Were we there just to make
Nino  happy?  Was  I  lying  to  myself  when  I  portrayed  myself  as  free  and
autonomous?  And  was  I  lying  to  my  audience  when  I  played  the  part  of
someone who, with her two small books, had sought to help every woman
confess what she couldn’t say to herself? Were they mere formulas that it was
convenient for me to believe in while in fact I was no different from my more
traditional  contemporaries?  In  spite  of  all  the  talk  was  I  letting  myself  be
invented by a man to the point where his needs were imposed on mine and
those of my daughters?
I learned to avoid myself. It was enough for Nino to knock on the door and
the bitterness vanished. I said to myself: Life now is this and can’t be other.
Meanwhile I tried to give myself some discipline, I didn’t resign myself, I tried
to be assertive, sometimes I even managed to feel happy. The house shone with
light. From my balcony I saw Naples stretching to the edges of the yellow-blue
reflection of the sea. I had taken my daughters away from the temporariness of
Genoa  and  Milan,  and  the  air,  the  colors,  the  sounds  of  the  dialect  in  the
streets, the cultured people Nino brought to see me even late into the night
gave me confidence, made me cheerful. I took the girls to see Pietro in Florence
and was pleased when he came to see them in Naples. Over Nino’s protests I let
him stay in my house. I made him a bed in the girls’ room; their affection for
him was a performance, as if they wanted to keep him with them through a
display of how much they loved him. We tried to have a casual relationship, I
inquired about Doriana, I asked about his book, which was always about to be
published when further details emerged that had to be examined. When the
children held tight to their father, ignoring me, I took a little break. I went
down through the Arco Mirelli and walked along Via Caracciolo, beside the sea.
Or I went up to Via Aniello Falcone and came to the Floridiana. I chose a bench,
I read.
31.
From  Via  Tasso  the  old  neighborhood  was  a  dim,  distant  rockpile,
indistinguishable urban debris at the foot of Vesuvius. I wanted it to stay that
way: I was another person now, I would make sure that it did not recapture me.
But in that case, too, the purpose I tended to attribute to myself was fragile. A
mere three or four days after the first harried arrangement of the apartment I
gave in. I dressed the children carefully, dressed up myself, and said: Now let’s
go see Grandmother Immacolata and Grandfather Vittorio and the uncles.
We left early in the morning and at Piazza Amedeo took the metro; the
children  were  excited  by  the  violent  wind  produced  by  the  train’s  arrival,
which ruffled their hair, pasted their dresses to their bodies, took away their
breath. I hadn’t seen or talked to my mother since the scene in Florence. I was
afraid she would refuse to see me and maybe for that reason I didn’t telephone
to announce my visit. But I have to be honest, there was another, more obscure
reason. I was reluctant to say to myself: I am here for this or that other reason,
I want to go here or I want to go there. The neighborhood for me, even more
than my family, was Lila: to plan that visit would also mean asking myself how
I wanted to arrange things with her. And I still didn’t have definite answers,
and so leaving it to chance was better. In any case, since it was possible that I
would  run  into  her,  I  had  devoted  the  greatest  attention  to  the  children’s
appearance and to my own. If it happened, I wanted her to realize that I was a
lady of refinement and that my daughters weren’t suffering, weren’t falling
apart, were doing very well.
It turned out to be an emotionally charged day. I went through the tunnel, I
avoided the gas pump where Carmen worked with her husband, Roberto, and
crossed the courtyard. My heart pounding, I climbed the crumbling stairs of
the old building where I was born. Dede and Elsa were very excited, as if they
were heading into some unknown adventure; I arrayed them in front of me
and rang the bell. I heard the limping gait of my mother, she opened the door,
she widened her eyes as if we were ghosts. I, too, in spite of myself, showed
astonishment. The person I expected to see had come unglued from the one
who was in fact before me. My mother was very changed. For a fraction of a
second she seemed to be a cousin of hers whom I had seen a few times as a
child, and who resembled her, although she was six or seven years older. She
was much thinner, the bones of her face, her nose, her ears seemed enormous.
I tried to hug her, she drew back. My father wasn’t there, nor were Peppe
and Gianni. To find out anything about them was impossible, for a good hour
she barely spoke a word to me. With the children she was affectionate. She
praised them mightily and then, enveloping them in large aprons, she began
making sugar candies with them. For me it was very awkward; the whole time
she acted as if I weren’t there. When I tried to say to the children that they
were eating too many candies, Dede quickly turned to her grandmother: “Can
we have some more?”
“Eat as many as you want,” my mother said, without looking at me.
The same scene was repeated when she told her grandchildren that they
could go play in the courtyard. In Florence, in Genoa, in Milan I had never let
them go out alone. I said: “No, girls, you can’t, stay here.”
“Grandma, can we go?” my daughters asked, almost in unison.
“I told you yes.”
We remained alone. I said to her anxiously, as if I were still a child: “I moved.
I’ve taken an apartment on Via Tasso.”
“Good.”
“Three days ago.”
“Good.”
“I’ve written another book.”
“What do I care?”
I  was  silent.  With  an  expression  of  disgust,  she  cut  a  lemon  in  two  and
squeezed the juice into a glass.
“Why are you having a lemonade?” I asked.
“Because seeing you turns my stomach.”
She added water to the lemon, put in some bicarbonate of soda, drank the
foamy effervescence in one gulp.
“Are you not well?”
“I’m very well.”
“It’s not true. Have you been to the doctor?”
“Imagine if I’ll throw away money on doctors and medicine.”
“Elisa knows you don’t feel well?”
“Elisa is pregnant.”
“Why didn’t you or she tell me anything?”
She didn’t answer. She placed the glass on the sink with a long, tired sigh,
wiped her lips with the back of her hand. I said: “I’ll take you to the doctor.
What else do you feel?”
“Everything  that  you  brought  on.  Because  of  you  a  vein  in  my  stomach
ruptured.”
“What do you mean?”
“Yes, you’ve killed this body.”
“I love you very much, Mamma.”
“Not me. You’ve come to stay in Naples with the children?”
“Yes.”
“And your husband’s not coming?”
“No.”
“Then don’t ever show up in this house again.”
“Ma, today it’s not like it used to be. You can be a respectable person even if
you leave your husband, even if you go with someone else. Why do you get so
angry with me when you don’t say anything about Elisa, who’s pregnant and
not married?”
“Because you’re not Elisa. Did Elisa study the way you did? From Elisa did I
expect what I expected from you?”
“I’m  doing  things  you  should  be  happy  about.  Greco  is  becoming  an
important name. I even have a little reputation abroad.”
“Don’t boast to me, you’re nobody. What you think you are means nothing
to normal people. I’m respected here not because I had you but because I had
Elisa. She didn’t study, she didn’t even graduate from middle school, but she’s a
lady. And you who have a university degree—where did you end up? I’m just
sorry for the two children, so pretty and they speak so well. Didn’t you think of
them? With that father they were growing up like children on television, and
you, what do you do, you bring them to Naples?”
“I’m the one who brought them up, Ma, not their father. And wherever I
take them they’ll still grow up like that.”
“You are presumptuous. Madonna, how many mistakes I made with you. I
thought Lina was the presumptuous one, but it’s you. Your friend bought a
house for her parents, did you do that? Your friend orders everyone around,
even Michele Solara, and who do you order around, that piece of shit son of
Sarratore?”
At that point she began to sing Lila’s praises: Ah, how pretty Lina is, how
generous,  now  she’s  got  her  own  business,  no  less,  she  and  Enzo—they’ve
known how to get ahead. I understood that the greatest sin she charged to me
was forcing her to admit, with no way out, that I was worth less than Lila.
When she said she wanted to cook something for Dede and Elsa, deliberately
excluding me, I realized that it would pain her to invite me to lunch and,
taking the children, I went away bitterly.
32.
Once on the stradone I hesitated: wait at the gate for my father’s return,
wander the streets in search of my brothers, see if my sister was home? I found
a telephone booth, I called Elisa, I dragged the girls to her big apartment, from
which you could see Vesuvius. My sister showed no signs yet of pregnancy, and
yet I found her very changed. The simple fact of being pregnant must have
made her expand suddenly, but distorting her. She was as if coarsened in her
body, in her words, in her voice. She had an ashy complexion and was so
poisoned by animosity that she welcomed us reluctantly. Not for a moment did
I find any trace of the affection nor the slightly childish admiration she had
always had for me. And when I mentioned our mother’s health she took an
aggressive tone that I wouldn’t have thought her capable of, at least with me.
She  exclaimed:  “Lenù,  the  doctor  said  she’s  fine,  it’s  her  soul  that  suffers.
Mamma is very healthy, she has her health, there’s nothing to treat except
sorrow. If you hadn’t disappointed her the way you have she wouldn’t be in
this state.”
“What sort of nonsense is that?”
She became even more rancorous.
“Nonsense? I’ll just tell you this: my health is worse than Mamma’s. And
anyway, now that you’re in Naples and you know more about doctors, you take
care of her, don’t leave it all on my shoulders. Enough for you to give her a bit
of attention and she’ll be healthy again.”
I tried to control myself, I didn’t want to quarrel. Why was she talking to me
like that? Had I, too, changed for the worse, like her? Were our good times as
sisters over? Or was Elisa, the youngest of the family, the outward sign that the
life of the neighborhood was even more ruinous than in the past? I told the
children, who sat obediently, in silence, but disappointed that their aunt paid
them not the slightest attention, that they could finish the candies from their
grandmother. Then I asked my sister: “How are things with Marcello?”
“Very good, how should they be? If it weren’t for all the worries he’s had
since his mother died, we’d really be happy.”
“What worries?”
“Worries, Lenù, worries. Go think about your books, life is something else.”
“Peppe and Gianni?”
“They work.”
“I never see them.”
“Your fault that you never come around.”
“I’ll come more often now.”
“Good for you. Then try to talk to your friend Lina, too.”
“What’s happening?”
“Nothing. But among Marcello’s many worries she’s one.”
“What do you mean?”
“Ask  Lina,  and  if  she  answers,  tell  her  that  she’d  better  stay  where  she
belongs.”
I recognized the threatening reticence of the Solaras and I realized that we
would never regain our old intimacy. I told her that Lila and I had grown apart,
but I had just heard from our mother that she had stopped working for Michele
and  had  set  up  on  her  own.  Elisa  muttered:  “Set  up  on  her  own  with  our
money.”
“Explain.”
“What is there to explain, Lenù? She twists Michele around her finger. But
not my Marcello.”
33.
Elisa didn’t invite us to lunch, either. Only when she led us to the door did
she seem to become aware that she had been rude, and she said to Elsa: Come
with your aunt. They disappeared for a few minutes, making Dede suffer; she
clutched my hand in order not to feel neglected. When they reappeared Elsa
had a serious expression but a cheerful gaze. My sister, who seemed worn out
by being on her feet, closed the door as soon as we started down the stairs.
Once we were in the street the child showed us her aunt’s secret gift: twenty
thousand lire. Elisa had given her money the way, when we were small, certain
relatives did who were scarcely better off than we were. But at that time the
money was only in appearance a gift for us children: we were bound to hand it
over  to  my  mother,  who  spent  it  on  necessities.  Elisa,  too,  evidently,  had
wanted to give the money to me rather than to Elsa, but for another purpose.
With  that  twenty  thousand  lire—the  equivalent  of  three  books  in  quality
bindings—she meant to prove to me that Marcello loved her and she led a life
of luxury.
I calmed the children, who were squabbling. Elsa had to be subjected to
persistent questioning in order to admit that, according to their aunt’s wishes,
the money should be divided, ten thousand to her and ten thousand to Dede.
They were still wrangling and tugging at each other when I heard someone
calling me. It was Carmen, bundled up in a blue gas-station attendant’s smock.
Distracted, I hadn’t taken a detour around the gas pump. Now she was making
signs of greeting, her hair curly and black, her face broad.
It was hard to resist. Carmen closed the pump, wanted to take us to her
house for lunch. Her husband, whom I had never met, arrived. He had gone to
get the children at school: two boys, one the same age as Elsa, the other a year
younger. He turned out to be a gentle, very cordial man. He set the table,
getting the children to help him, he cleared, he washed the dishes. Until that
moment I had never seen a couple of my generation get along so well, so
obviously content to live together. Finally I felt welcomed, and I saw that my
daughters,  too,  were  at  ease:  they  ate  heartily,  with  maternal  tones  they
devoted themselves to the two boys. In other words I felt reassured, I had a
couple of hours of tranquility. Then Roberto hurried out to reopen the pump,
and Carmen and I were alone.
She was discreet, she didn’t ask about Nino, if I had moved to Naples to live
with him, even though she seemed to know everything. Instead she talked
about her husband, a hard worker, and attached to the family. Lenù, she said,
amid  so  much  suffering  he  and  the  children  are  the  only  consolation.  She
recalled the past: the terrible story of her father, the sacrifices of her mother
and her mother’s death, the period when she worked in Stefano Carracci’s
grocery store, and then when Ada replaced Lila and had tortured her. We even
laughed a little about the time when she was Enzo’s girlfriend: What nonsense,
she said. She didn’t mention Pasquale even once; I had to ask. But she stared at
the  floor,  shook  her  head,  jumped  up  as  if  to  push  away  something  she
wouldn’t or couldn’t tell me.
“I’m going to call Lina,” she said. “If she knows we saw each other and I
didn’t tell her she’ll never speak to me again.”
“Forget it, she’ll be working.”
“Come on, she’s the boss now and she does as she likes.”
I tried to keep her talking, and asked her cautiously about the relations
between Lila and the Solaras. But she was embarrassed, she answered that she
didn’t know much about it and went to call. I heard her announcing excitedly
that my daughters and I were in her house. When she returned she said:
“She’s very pleased, she’ll be right over.”
From that moment I began to get nervous. And yet I felt well disposed, it was
comfortable in that modest, respectable house, the four children playing in the
other room. The bell rang, Carmen went to the door, there was Lila’s voice.
34.
I didn’t notice Gennaro at first, nor did I see Enzo. They became visible only
after a long series of seconds in which I heard only Lila and felt an unexpected
sense of guilt. Maybe it seemed wrong that it was she, yet again, who was eager
to see me, while I insisted on keeping her outside of my life. Or maybe it
seemed to me rude that she continued to be interested in me, while I, by my
silence, by my absence, intended to signal to her that she no longer interested
me. I don’t know. Certainly as she hugged me I thought: if she doesn’t attack
me with spiteful talk about Nino, if she pretends not to know about his new
child, if she is nice to my daughters, I’ll be polite, then we’ll see.
So we sat down. We hadn’t seen each other since the meeting in the bar on
Via Duomo. It was Lila who spoke first. She pushed Gennaro forward—a large
adolescent,  his  face  marked  by  acne—and  immediately  began  to  complain
about his scholastic performance. She said, but in an affectionate tone: he did
well in elementary school, he did well in middle school, but this year they’re
failing him, he can’t manage Latin and Greek. I gave the boy a pat, I consoled
him:  you  just  have  to  practice,  Gennà,  come  to  me,  I’ll  tutor  you.  And
impulsively I decided to take the initiative, confronting what for me was the
burning issue, I said: I moved to Naples a few days ago, things with Nino are
resolved within the limits of the possible, everything’s fine. Then, calmly, I
called  my  daughters,  and  when  they  looked  in  I  exclaimed,  Here  are  the
children, how do you find them, see how they’ve grown. There was confusion.
Dede recognized Gennaro and happily pulled him after her with a seductive
look, she nine and he nearly fifteen; Elsa in turn tugged at him, in order not to
be outdone by her sister. I looked at them with motherly pride and was glad
that Lila meanwhile said: You’ve done well to return to Naples, one should do
what one feels like doing, the girls look really well, how pretty they are.
At that point I felt relieved. Enzo, making conversation, asked me about
work. I boasted a little about the success of the last book, but I immediately
understood that though people in the neighborhood had heard of my first book
at the time and some had even read it, not even Enzo and Carmen, or Lila,
knew about the second. So I circled around it in a self-mocking tone and then I
asked about their activities, I said, laughing: I know you’ve gone from being
workers to bosses. Lila made a face as if to disparage this, and turned to Enzo,
who tried to explain in simple terms. He said that computers in recent years
had  evolved,  he  said  that  IBM  had  put  machines  on  the  market  that  were
completely different from the earlier ones. As usual he got lost in technical
details  that  bored  me.  He  cited  products,  the  System  34,  the  5120,  and
explained that there were no longer either perforated cards or punch-card
machines and checkers but a different programming language, BASIC, while
the machines kept getting smaller, with less power for calculation and storage
but much less costly. In the end I understood only that that new technology
had been crucial for them; they had begun to study up and had decided that
they could go out on their own. So they had started their own business, Basic
Sight—in  English,  because  otherwise  they  don’t  take  you  seriously—and  of  that
business, with headquarters in the rooms of their house (hardly bosses), he,
Enzo, was the majority partner and administrator, but the soul, the true soul—
Enzo pointed to her with a gesture of pride—was Lila. Look at the logo, he said,
she designed it.
I examined the logo, a swirl around a vertical line. I stared at it with sudden
emotion, as a further manifestation of her ungovernable mind—I wondered
how many I had missed. I felt a sudden longing for the good moments of our
past. Lila learned, set aside, learned. She couldn’t stop, she never retreated: the
34, the 5120, BASIC, Basic Sight, the logo. Lovely, I said, and I felt then the way I
hadn’t felt with my mother and my sister. They all seemed happy to have me
among them again, and drew me generously into their lives. Enzo, as if to
demonstrate that his ideas hadn’t changed in spite of prosperity, began to
relate in his dry manner what he saw when he went around to the factories:
people  were  working  in  terrible  conditions  for  practically  nothing,  and
sometimes he was ashamed at having to transform the filth of exploitation into
the tidiness of programming. Lila, for her part, said that to obtain that tidiness
the bosses had been forced to show her all their dirt close up, and she spoke
sarcastically about the duplicity, the tricks, the scams that were behind the
façade of orderly accounts. Carmen was not to be outdone, she talked about
gas, she exclaimed: Here, too, there’s shit everywhere. And only at that point
she mentioned her brother, citing all the right reasons that had led him to do
wrong  things.  She  recalled  the  neighborhood  of  our  childhood  and
adolescence. She told the story—she had never told it before—of when she and
Pasquale were children and their father listed point by point what the fascists,
led by Don Achille, had done to him: the time he had been beaten up right at
the entrance to the tunnel; the time they’d made him kiss the photograph of
Mussolini but he had spit on it, and if they hadn’t murdered him, if he hadn’t
disappeared like so many comrades—there is no history of those whom the fascists
killed and then “disappeared”—it was only because he had the carpentry shop and
was well known in the neighborhood, and if they had removed him from the
face of the earth everyone would have noticed.
So the time passed. At a certain point there was such a strong feeling of
friendship that they decided to give me real proof of it. Carmen consulted Enzo
and Lila with a look, then she said warily: We can trust Lenuccia. When she saw
that  they  agreed  she  said  that  they  had  recently  seen  Pasquale.  He  had
appeared one night at Carmen’s house, and she had called Lila, and Lila had
hurried over with Enzo. Pasquale was well. He was clean, not a hair out of
place, very well dressed, he looked like a surgeon. But they had found him sad.
His ideas had remained the same, but he was incredibly sad. He had said that
he would never surrender, that they would have to kill him. Before leaving he
had looked in at his nephews as they slept: he didn’t even know their names.
Carmen here began to cry, but silently, so that her children wouldn’t come in.
We said, she first of all, she more than me, more than Lila (Lila was laconic,
Enzo confined himself to nodding), that we didn’t like Pasquale’s choices, that
we felt horror at the bloody disorder of Italy and the world, but that he knew
the  same  essential  things  that  we  knew,  and  even  if  he  had  committed
whatever terrible acts—among those you read about in the papers—and even if
we  were  comfortable  with  our  lives  in  information  technology,  Latin  and
Greek, books, gas, we would never reject him. None of those who loved him
would do so.
The day ended there. There was only one last question, which I asked Lila
and Enzo, because I was feeling at ease and had in mind what Elisa had said to
me a little earlier. I asked: And the Solaras? Enzo immediately stared at the
floor.  Lila  shrugged,  she  said:  The  usual  pieces  of  shit.  Then  she  said
sarcastically that Michele had gone mad: after his mother’s death he had left
Gigliola, he had thrown his wife and children out of the house on Posillipo and
if they showed up there he beat them. The Solaras—she said, with a hint of
gratification—are finished: imagine, Marcello goes around saying it’s my fault
that his brother is behaving like that. And here she narrowed her eyes, with an
expression of satisfaction, as if what Marcello said were a compliment. Then
she concluded: A lot of things have changed, Lenù, since you left; you should
stay with us now; give me your phone number, we ought see each other as
much as we can; and then I want to send you Gennaro, you have to see if you
can help him.
She took a pen and got ready to write. I dictated the first two numbers right
away, then I got confused, I had learned the number only a few days earlier
and I couldn’t remember it. When, however, it did come to mind precisely, I
hesitated  again,  I  was  afraid  she  would  come  back  and  settle  in  my  life;  I
dictated two more numbers, and got the other numbers wrong on purpose.
It was a good thing. Just as I was about to leave with the girls Lila asked me
in front of everyone, including Dede and Elsa:
“Will you have a child with Nino?”
35.
Of course not, I responded, and laughed in embarrassment. But on the street
I had to explain, to Elsa especially—Dede was grimly silent—that I would not
have other children, they were my children and that was that. And for two
days I had a headache, I couldn’t sleep. A few deliberately placed words and
Lila had disrupted an encounter that had seemed to me pleasant. I said to
myself: There’s nothing to be done, she’s incurable, she always knows how to
complicate my existence. And I wasn’t alluding only to the anxieties she had
unleashed in Dede and Elsa. Lila had struck with precision a point in myself
that I kept carefully hidden and which had to do with the urge for motherhood
I’d noticed for the first time a dozen years ago, when I had held little Mirko, in
Mariarosa’s  house.  It  had  been  a  completely  irrational  impulse,  a  sort  of
command of love, which at the time had overwhelmed me. I had intuited even
then that it was not a simple wish to have a child, I wanted a particular child, a
child like Mirko, a child of Nino’s. And in fact that yearning had not been
alleviated  by  Pietro  and  the  conception  of  Dede  and  Elsa.  Rather,  it  had
reemerged recently, when I saw Silvia’s child and, especially, when Nino had
told  me  that  Eleonora  was  pregnant.  Now,  with  increasing  frequency,  it
rummaged around in me, and Lila, with her usual acute gaze, had seen it. It’s
her favorite game—I said to myself—she does it with Enzo, with Carmen, with
Antonio, with Alfonso. She must have behaved the same way with Michele
Solara, with Gigliola. She pretends to be a kind and affectionate person, but
then she gives you a slight nudge, she moves you a tiny bit, and she ruins you.
She wants to go back to acting like that with me, and with Nino, too. She had
managed to bring out into the open a secret tremor that in general I tried to
ignore, as one ignores the twitching of an eyelid.
For days, in the house on Via Tasso, alone and in company, I was constantly
agitated by the question: Will you have a child with Nino? But now it wasn’t Lila’s
question, I asked it of myself.
36.
After  that,  I  returned  often  to  the  neighborhood,  especially  when  Pietro
came  to  stay  with  the  girls.  I  walked  to  Piazza  Amedeo,  I  took  the  metro.
Sometimes I stopped on the railroad bridge and looked down on the stradone,
sometimes I just went through the tunnel and walked to the church. But more
often I went to fight with my mother, insisting that she go to a doctor, and I
involved my father, Peppe, Gianni in that battle. She was a stubborn woman,
she got angry at her husband and sons as soon as they alluded to her health
problems. With me, it was always the same, she cried: Shut up, you’re the one
who’s killing me, and she threw me out, or locked herself in the bathroom.
Lila instead had what it takes, and everyone knew it; Michele, for example,
had realized it long ago. So Elisa’s aversion toward her was due not only to
some disagreement with Marcello but to the fact that Lila had yet again broken
off from the Solaras and, after using them, had done well. Basic Sight was
earning  her  a  growing  reputation  for  innovation  and  for  profit.  It  was  no
longer a matter of the brilliant person who since she was a child had had the
capacity to take the disorder from your head and heart to give it back to you
well organized or, if she couldn’t stand you, to confuse your ideas and leave
you depressed. Now she also embodied the possibility of learning a new job, a
job that no one knew anything about but was lucrative. The business was going
so well—people said—that Enzo was looking for a space for a proper office and
not  the  makeshift  one  that  he  had  installed  between  the  kitchen  and  the
bedroom. But who was Enzo, clever though he might be? Only a subordinate of
Lila. It was she who moved things, who made and unmade. So, to exaggerate
just slightly, the situation in the neighborhood seemed in a short time to have
become the following: you learned either to be like Marcello and Michele or to
be like Lila.
Of course, it might be that it was my obsession, but in that phase, at least, I
seemed increasingly to see her in all the people who had been or were close to
her.  Once,  for  example,  I  ran  into  Stefano  Carracci,  much  heavier,  his
complexion yellowish, shabbily dressed. There was absolutely nothing left of
the young shopkeeper Lila had married, least of all his money. And yet from
the little conversation we had it seemed to me that he used many of his wife’s
phrases. And Ada, too, who at that point had great respect for Lila and said nice
things about her, because of the money she gave Stefano, seemed to imitate
her gestures, maybe even her way of laughing.
Relatives and friends crowded around her in search of a job, making an
effort to appear suitable. Ada herself was hired out of the blue at Basic Sight,
she was to begin by answering the telephone, then maybe she would learn
other things. Rino, too—who one bad day had quarreled with Marcello and left
the  supermarket—inserted  himself  into  his  sister’s  activity  without  even
asking permission, boasting that he could learn in no time all there was to
learn. But the most unexpected news for me—Nino told me one night, he had
heard  it  from  Marisa—was  that  even  Alfonso  had  ended  up  at  Basic  Sight.
Michele Solara, who continued to act in a crazy way, had closed the shop in
Piazza dei Martiri for no reason and Alfonso was left without a job. As a result
now he, too—and successfully—was being retrained, thanks to Lila.
I could have found out more, and maybe I would have liked to, all I had to do
was call her, stop by. But I never did. Once only I met her on the street and
stopped  reluctantly.  She  must  have  been  offended  that  I  had  told  her  the
wrong phone number, that I had offered to give lessons to her son and instead
had disappeared, that she had done everything to reconcile with me and I had
withdrawn. She said she was in a hurry, she asked in dialect:
“Are you still living on Via Tasso?”
“Yes.”
“It’s out of the way.”
“It has a view of the sea.”
“What’s the sea, from up there? A bit of color. Better if you’re closer, that
way you notice that there’s filth, mud, piss, polluted water. But you who read
and write books like to tell lies, not the truth.”
I cut her short, I said:
“For now I’m there.”
She cut me even shorter:
“One can always change. How many times do we say one thing and then do
another? Take a place here.”
I shook my head, I said goodbye. Was that what she wanted? To bring me
back to the neighborhood?
37.
Then  in  my  already  complicated  life  two  completely  unexpected  things
happened at the same time. Nino’s research institute was invited to New York
for some important job and a tiny publishing house in Boston published my
book. Those two events turned into a possible trip to the United States.
After endless hesitations, endless discussions, some quarrels, we decided to
take that vacation. But I would have to leave Dede and Elsa for two weeks. Even
under normal conditions I had a hard time making arrangements: I wrote for
some journals, I did translations, I took part in debates in places large and
small, I compiled notes for a new book, and to arrange for the children with all
that  hectic  activity  was  always  extremely  difficult.  In  general  I  turned  to
Mirella, a student of Nino’s, who was very reliable and didn’t ask much, but if
she wasn’t available I left them with Antonella, a neighbor of around fifty, the
competent mother of grown children. This time I tried to get Pietro to take
them,  but  he  said  it  was  impossible  just  then  to  have  them  for  so  long.  I
examined the situation (I had no relationship with Adele, Mariarosa had left
and no one knew where she was, my mother was weakened by her elusive
illness,  Elisa  was  increasingly  hostile),  and  there  didn’t  seem  to  be  an
acceptable solution. It was Pietro who finally said to me: Ask Lina, she left her
son with you for months, she’s in your debt. I had a hard time making up my
mind. The more superficial part of me imagined that, although she had showed
that in spite of her work obligations she was available, she would treat my
daughters like fussy, demanding little dolls, she would torment them, or leave
them to Gennaro; while a more hidden part, which perhaps upset me more
than the first, considered her the only person I knew who would devote herself
entirely to making them comfortable. It was the urgency of finding a solution
that drove me to call her. To my tentative and evasive request she responded
without hesitation, as usual surprising me:
“Your daughters are more than my daughters, bring them to me whenever
you like and go do your things as long as you want.”
Even though I had told her that I was going with Nino, she never mentioned
him, not even when, with all kinds of cautions, I brought her the children. And
so in May of 1980, consumed by misgivings and yet excited, I left for the United
States. It was an extraordinary experience. I felt again that I had no limits, I
was  capable  of  flying  over  oceans,  expanding  over  the  entire  world:  an
exhilarating delirium. Naturally the two weeks were very exhausting and very
expensive. The women who had published my book had no money and even
though  they  were  generous  I  still  spent  a  lot.  As  for  Nino,  he  had  trouble
getting reimbursed even for his airplane ticket. Yet we were happy. I, at least,
have never been so happy as in those days.
When we got back I was sure I was pregnant. Already before leaving for
America I had had some suspicions, but I hadn’t said anything to Nino and for
the  entire  vacation  I  had  savored  the  possibility  in  secret,  with  a  heedless
pleasure. But when I went to get my daughters I had no more doubts and,
feeling  so  literally  full  of  life,  I  was  tempted  to  confide  in  Lila.  As  usual,
however, I gave up on the idea, I thought: She’ll say something unpleasant,
she’ll remind me that I claimed I didn’t want another child. I was radiant and
Lila, as if my happiness had infected her, greeted me with an air that was no
less content, she exclaimed: How beautiful you look. I gave her the gifts I had
brought for her, for Enzo, and for Gennaro. I told her in detail about the cities I
had seen, the encounters I’d had. From the plane, I said, I saw a piece of the
Atlantic Ocean through a hole in the clouds. The people are very friendly,
they’re not reserved the way they are in Germany, or arrogant, as in France.
Even if you speak English badly they listen to you with attention and make an
effort  to  understand.  In  the  restaurants  everybody  shouts,  more  than  in
Naples. If you compare the skyscraper on Corso Novara with the ones in Boston
or New York, you realize it’s not a skyscraper. The streets are numbered, they
don’t  have  the  names  of  people  everyone’s  forgotten  by  now.  I  never
mentioned Nino, I didn’t say anything about him and his work, I acted as if I
had gone by myself. She listened attentively, she asked questions I wasn’t able
to answer, and then she praised my daughters sincerely, she said she had got
on very well with them. I was pleased, and again I was on the point of telling
her that I was expecting a child. But Lila didn’t give me time, she whispered
seriously: Lucky you’re back, Lenù, I’ve just had some good news and it makes
me happy to tell you first of all. She, too, was pregnant.
38.
Lila had dedicated herself to the children body and soul. And it could not
have been easy to wake them in time in the morning, get them washed and
dressed, give them a solid but quick breakfast, take them to school in the Via
Tasso  neighborhood  amid  the  morning  chaos  of  the  city,  pick  them  up
punctually in that same turmoil, bring them back to the neighborhood, feed
them, supervise their homework, and keep up with her job, her domestic tasks.
But, when I questioned Dede and Elsa closely, it became clear that she had
managed very well. And now for them I was a more inadequate mother than
ever. I didn’t know how to make pasta with tomato sauce the way Aunt Lina
did,  I  didn’t  know  how  to  dry  their  hair  and  comb  it  with  the  skill  and
gentleness she had, I didn’t know how to perform any task that Aunt Lina
didn’t approach with a superior sensitivity, except maybe singing certain songs
that they loved and that she had admitted she didn’t know. To this it should be
added that, especially in Dede’s eyes, that marvelous woman whom I didn’t
visit often enough (Mamma, why don’t we go see Aunt Lina, why don’t you let us
sleep at her house more, don’t you have to go away anymore?) had a specific quality
that made her unequalled: she was the mother of Gennaro, whom my older
daughter  usually  called  Rino,  and  who  seemed  to  her  the  most  wonderful
person of the male sex in the world.
At  the  moment  I  was  hurt.  My  relations  with  the  children  were  not
wonderful  and  their  idealization  of  Lila  made  things  worse.  Once,  at  yet
another criticism of me, I lost my patience, I yelled: O.K., go to the market of
mothers and buy another one. That market was a game of ours that generally
served to alleviate conflicts and reconcile us. I would say: Sell me at the market
of mothers if I’m no good for you; and they would answer, no, Mamma, we
don’t want to sell you, we like you the way you are. On that occasion, however,
maybe because of my harsh tone, Dede answered: Yes, let’s go right now, we
can sell you and buy Aunt Lina.
That was the atmosphere for a while. And certainly it wasn’t the best one for
telling  the  children  that  I  had  lied  to  them.  My  emotional  state  was
complicated:  shameless,  shy,  happy,  anxious,  innocent,  guilty.  And  I  didn’t
know  where  to  begin,  the  conversation  was  difficult:  children,  I  thought  I
didn’t want another child, but I did, and in fact I’m pregnant, you’ll have a little
brother or maybe another sister, but the father isn’t your father, the father is
Nino, who already has a wife and two children, and I don’t know how he’ll take
it. I thought about it, thought about it again, and put it off.
Then out of the blue came a conversation that surprised me. Dede, in front
of Elsa, who listened in some alarm, said in the tone she took when she wanted
to explain a problem full of perils: “You know that Aunt Lina sleeps with Enzo,
but they’re not married?”
“Who told you?”
“Rino. Enzo isn’t his father.”
“Rino told you that, too?”
“Yes. So I asked Aunt Lina and she explained to me.”
“What did she explain?”
She was tense. She observed me to see if she was making me angry.
“Shall I tell you?”
“Yes.”
“Aunt Lina has a husband just as you do, and that husband is Rino’s father,
his name is Stefano Carracci. Then she has Enzo, Enzo Scanno, who sleeps with
her. And the exact same thing happens with you: you have Papa, whose name
is Airota, but you sleep with Nino, whose name is Sarratore.”
I smiled to reassure her.
“How did you ever learn all those surnames?”
“Aunt Lina talked to us about it, she said that they’re stupid. Rino came out
of her stomach, he lives with her, but he’s called Carracci like his father. We
came out of your stomach, we live much more with you than with Papa, but
we’re called Airota.”
“So?”
“Mamma, if someone talks about Aunt Lina’s stomach he doesn’t say this is
Stefano Carracci’s stomach, he says this is Lina Cerullo’s stomach. The same
goes for you: your stomach is Elena Greco’s stomach, not Pietro Airota’s.”
“And what does that mean?”
“That it would be more correct for Rino to be called Rino Cerullo and us
Dede and Elsa Greco.”
“Is that your idea?”
“No, Aunt Lina’s.”
“What do you think?”
“I think the same thing.”
“Yes?”
“Yes, absolutely.”
But  Elsa,  since  the  atmosphere  seemed  favorable,  tugged  at  me  and
intervened: “It’s not true, Mamma. She said that when she gets married she’ll
be called Dede Carracci.”
Dede exclaimed furiously: “Shut up, you’re a liar.”
I turned to Elsa:
“Why Dede Carracci?”
“Because she wants to marry Rino.”
I asked Dede:
“You like Rino?”
“Yes,” she said in an argumentative tone, “and even if we don’t get married
I’ll sleep with him just the same.”
“With Rino?”
“Yes. Like Aunt Lina with Enzo. And also like you with Nino.”
“Can she do that, Mamma?” Elsa asked, dubiously.
I didn’t answer, I was evasive. But that exchange improved my mood and
initiated a new phase. It didn’t take much, in fact, to recognize that with this
and other conversations about real and pretend fathers, about old and new last
names, Lila had managed to make the living situation into which I had cast
Dede and Elsa not only acceptable in their eyes but even interesting. In fact
almost  miraculously  my  daughters  stopped  talking  about  how  they  missed
Adele and Mariarosa; they stopped saying, when they returned from Florence,
that they wanted to go and stay forever with their father and Doriana; they
stopped making trouble for Mirella, the babysitter, as if she were their worst
enemy;  they  stopped  rejecting  Naples,  the  school,  the  teachers,  their
classmates, and, above all, the fact that Nino slept in my bed. In short, they
seemed more serene. And I noted those changes with relief. However vexing it
might be that Lila had entered the lives of my daughters, binding them to her,
the last thing I could accuse her of was not having given them the utmost
affection, the utmost care, assistance in reducing their anxieties. That was the
Lila I loved. She could emerge unexpectedly from within her very meanness,
surprising  me.  Suddenly  every  offense  faded—she’s  malicious,  she  always  has
been, but she’s also much more, you have to put up with her—and I acknowledged
that she was helping me do less harm to my daughters.
One morning I woke up and thought of her without hostility for the first
time in a long while. I remembered when she got married, her first pregnancy:
she was sixteen, only seven or eight years older than Dede. My daughter would
soon be the age of the ghosts of our girlhood. I found it inconceivable that in a
relatively small amount of time, my daughter could wear a wedding dress, as
Lila had, end up brutalized in a man’s bed, lock herself into the role of Signora
Carracci; I found it equally inconceivable that, as had happened to me, she
could lie under the heavy body of a grown man, at night, on the Maronti,
smeared  with  dark  sand,  damp  air,  and  bodily  fluids,  just  for  revenge.  I
remembered the thousands of odious things we had gone through and I let the
solidarity regain force. What a waste it would be, I said to myself, to ruin our
story by leaving too much space for ill feelings: ill feelings are inevitable, but
the essential thing is to keep them in check. I grew close to Lila again with the
excuse that the children liked seeing her. Our pregnancies did the rest.
39.
But we were two very different pregnant women. My body reacted with
eager  acceptance,  hers  with  reluctance.  And  yet  from  the  beginning  Lila
emphasized that she had wanted that pregnancy, she said, laughing: I planned
it. Yet there was something in her body that, as usual, put up resistance. Thus
while I immediately felt as if a sort of rose-colored light flickered inside me,
she  became  greenish,  the  whites  of  her  eyes  turned  yellow,  she  detested
certain  smells,  she  threw  up  continuously.  What  should  I  do,  she  said,  I’m
happy, but that thing in my belly isn’t, it’s mad at me. Enzo denied it, he said:
Come on, he’s happier than anyone. And according to Lila, who made fun of
him, he meant: I put it in there, trust me, I saw that it’s good and you mustn’t
worry.
When I ran into Enzo I felt more liking for him than usual, more admiration.
It was as if to his old pride a new one had been added, which was manifested in
a vastly increased desire to work and, at the same time, in a vigilance at home,
in the office, on the street, all aimed at defending his companion from physical
and metaphysical dangers and anticipating her every desire. He took on the
task  of  giving  Stefano  the  news;  he  didn’t  blink,  he  half  grimaced  and
withdrew, maybe because by now the old grocery made almost nothing and
the subsidies he got from his ex-wife were essential, maybe because every
connection between him and Lila must have seemed to him a very old story,
what did it matter to him if she was pregnant, he had other problems, other
desires.
But, mainly, Enzo took on the job of telling Gennaro. Lila in fact had reasons
to feel embarrassment with her son that were no different from mine—but
certainly more justified—for feeling embarrassed with Dede and Elsa. Gennaro
wasn’t a child and childish tones and words couldn’t be used with him. He was
a boy in the full crisis of puberty who couldn’t find an equilibrium. Failed twice
in a row in high school, he had become hypersensitive, unable to hold back
tears, or emerge from his humiliation. He spent days wandering the streets or
in his father’s grocery, sitting in a corner, picking at the pimples on his broad
face and studying Stefano in every gesture and expression, without saying a
word.
He’ll take it really badly, Lila worried, but meanwhile she was afraid that
someone else would tell him, Stefano for example. So one evening Enzo took
him aside and told him about the pregnancy. Gennaro was impassive, Enzo
urged him: Go hug your mother, let her know that you love her. The boy
obeyed.  But  a  few  days  later  Elsa  asked  me  in  secret:  “Mamma,  what’s  a
tramp?”
“A beggar.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“Rino told Dede that Aunt Lina is a tramp.”
Problems, in other words. I didn’t talk to Lila about it, that seemed pointless.
And then I had my own difficulties: I couldn’t bring myself to tell Pietro, I
couldn’t tell the children, mainly I couldn’t tell Nino. I was sure that when
Pietro found out I was pregnant he would be resentful, even though he now
had Doriana, and would turn to his parents, would induce his mother to make
trouble for me in every way possible. I was sure that Dede and Elsa would
become hostile again. But my real worry was Nino. I hoped that the birth of the
child would bind him definitively to me. I hoped that Eleonora, once she found
out about that new fatherhood, would leave him. But it was a feeble hope,
usually fear predominated. Nino had told me clearly: he preferred that double
life—even though it caused all sorts of problems, anxieties, tensions—to the
trauma of an absolute break with his wife. I was afraid he would ask me to have
an abortion. So every day I was on the point of telling him and every day I said
to myself: No, better tomorrow.
Instead everything began to sort itself out. One night I telephoned Pietro
and told him: I’m pregnant. There was a long silence, he cleared his throat, he
said softly that he expected it. He asked: “Have you told the children?”
“No.”
“Do you want me to tell them?”
“No.”
“Be careful.”
“All right.”
That was it. He began to call more often. His tone was affectionate, he was
worried about how the girls would react, he offered every time to talk to them
about it. But in the end it was neither of us. It was Lila, who, although she had
refused  to  tell  her  own  son,  convinced  Dede  and  Elsa  that  it  would  be  a
wonderful thing to occupy themselves, when the time came, with the funny
live doll that I had made with Nino and not with their father. They took it well.
Since Aunt Lina had called it a doll, they began to use the same word. They
were interested in my stomach, and every morning when they woke up they
asked, Mamma, how’s the doll?
Between telling Pietro and telling the girls, I finally confronted Nino. It went
like this. One afternoon when I felt especially anxious I went to see Lila to
complain, and asked her: “What if he wants me to have an abortion?”
“Well,” she said, “then everything becomes perfectly clear.”
“What’s clear?”
“That his wife and children come first, then you.”
Direct, brutal. Lila hid many things from me, but not her aversion to my
union. I wasn’t sorry, in fact I knew that it did me good to speak explicitly. In
the end she had said what I didn’t dare say to myself, that Nino’s reaction
would provide proof of the solidity of our bond. I muttered something like: It’s
possible, we’ll see. When, soon afterward, Carmen arrived with her children,
and  Lila  drew  her,  too,  into  the  conversation,  the  afternoon  became  like
afternoons  of  our  adolescence.  We  confided  in  each  other,  we  plotted,  we
planned. Carmen got mad, she said that if Nino was opposed she was ready to
go and speak to him in person. And she added: I don’t understand how it’s
possible, Lenù, that a person at your level can let someone walk all over you. I
tried to justify myself and to justify my companion. I said that his in-laws had
helped and were helping him, that everything Nino and I could afford was
possible only because, thanks to his wife’s family, he had a good income. I
admitted that, with what I got from my books and from Pietro, the girls and I
would have a hard time scraping by in a respectable way. And I added: Don’t
get the wrong idea, though, Nino is very affectionate, he sleeps at my house at
least four times a week, he has always avoided humiliating me in any way,
when he can he takes care of Dede and Elsa as if they were his. But as soon as I
stopped speaking Lila almost ordered me: “Then tell him tonight.”
I obeyed. I went home and when he arrived we had dinner, I put the children
to  bed,  and  finally  I  told  him  that  I  was  pregnant.  There  was  a  very  long
moment, then he hugged me, kissed me, he was very happy. I whispered with
relief:  I’ve  known  for  a  while,  but  I  was  afraid  you  would  be  angry.  He
reproached me, and said something that amazed me: We have to go with Dede
and Elsa to my parents and give them this good news, too—my mother will be
pleased. He wanted in that way to sanction our union, he wanted to make his
new paternity official. I gave a halfhearted sign of agreement, then I said: “But
you’ll tell Eleonora?”
“It’s none of her business.”
“You’re still her husband.”
“It’s pure form.”
“You’ll have to give your name to our child.”
“I’ll do it.”
I became agitated.
“No, Nino, you won’t do it, you’ll pretend it’s nothing, as you’ve done up to
now.”
“Aren’t you happy with me?”
“I’m very happy.”
“Do I neglect you?”
“No. But I left my husband, I came to live in Naples, I changed my life from
top to bottom. You instead still have yours, and it’s intact.”
“My life is you, your children, this child who’s about to arrive. The rest is a
necessary background.”
“Necessary to whom? To you? Certainly not to me.”
He hugged me tight, he whispered: “Have faith.”
The next day I called Lila and said to her: Everything’s fine, Nino was really
happy.
40.
Complicated weeks followed; I often thought that if my body hadn’t reacted
with such delighted naturalness to pregnancy, if I had been in Lila’s state of
continuous physical suffering, I wouldn’t have held up. My publisher, after
much  resistance,  finally  brought  out  Nino’s  collection  of  essays,  and  I—
continuing to imitate Adele, in spite of our terrible relationship—took on the
job of persuading both the few prominent people I knew to cover it in the
newspapers, and the many, very many, he knew, but out of pride refused to
telephone. Around at the same time, Pietro’s book also was published, and he
brought a copy to me himself when he came to Naples to see his daughters. He
waited anxiously while I read the dedication (embarrassing: to Elena, who taught
me to love with suffering), we were both excited, he invited me to a celebration in
his honor in Florence. I had to go, if only to bring the children. But then I was
forced to face not only the open hostility of my in-laws but also, before and
after, Nino’s agitation: he was jealous of every contact with Pietro, angry about
the dedication, surly because I had said that my ex-husband’s book was really
good and was talked about with great respect within the academic world and
outside it, unhappy because his volume was going completely unnoticed.
How  exhausting  our  relationship  was,  and  how  many  hazards  were
concealed in every gesture, in every sentence that I uttered, that he uttered.
He didn’t even want to hear Pietro’s name, he darkened if I recalled Franco, he
became jealous if I laughed too much with some friend of his, yet he found it
completely normal to divide himself between me and his wife. A couple of
times I ran into him on Via Filangieri with Eleonora and the two children: the
first time they pretended not to see me, and kept going; the second I stopped
in  front  of  them  with  a  warm  smile,  I  said  a  few  words  referring  to  my
pregnancy, even though it wasn’t visible, I went off in a rage, with my heart
pounding in my throat. When, later, he reproached me for what he called a
needlessly provocative attitude, we quarreled (I didn’t tell her that you’re the
father: all I said was I’m pregnant), I threw him out of the house, I welcomed him
back.
At those moments I saw myself suddenly for what I was: a slave, willing to
always do what he wanted, careful not to exaggerate in order not to get him in
trouble, not to displease him. I wasted my time cooking for him, washing the
dirty clothes he left in the house, listening to all his troubles at the university
and in the many responsibilities that he was accumulating, thanks to the aura
of good feeling that surrounded him and the small powers of his father-in-law;
I always welcomed him joyfully, I wanted him to be happier with me than in
the other house, I wanted him to relax, to confide, I felt sorry that he was
continuously overwhelmed by obligations; I even wondered if Eleonora might
love him more than I did, since she accepted every insult just to feel that he
was still hers. But sometimes I couldn’t stand it anymore and I yelled at him,
despite the risk that the girls might hear: Who am I for you, tell me why I’m in
this city, why I wait for you every night, why I tolerate this situation.
He became frightened and begged me to calm down. It was probably to show
me that I—I alone—was his wife, and Eleonora had no importance in his life,
that he really wanted to take me to lunch one Sunday at his parents’, in their
house on Via Nazionale. I didn’t know how to say no. The day passed slowly
and the mood was one of affection. Lidia, Nino’s mother, was an old woman,
worn down by weariness; her eyes seemed terrified not by the external world
but by a threat she felt from within. As for Pino, Clelia, and Ciro, whom I had
known as children, they were adults, who studied, who worked, Clelia had
recently gotten married. Soon Marisa and Alfonso arrived with their children,
and the lunch began. There were innumerable courses, and it lasted from two
in the afternoon until six at night, in an atmosphere of forced gaiety, but also
of sincere feeling. Lidia, especially, treated me as if I were her real daughter-in-
law, she wanted to keep me beside her, she complimented my daughters, and
congratulated me for the child I carried in my womb.
Naturally the only source of tension was Donato. Seeing him after twenty
years made an impression on me. He wore a dark blue smoking jacket, and on
his feet brown slippers. He was as if shrunken and broadened, he kept waving
his stubby hands, with their dark age spots and a blackish arc of dirt under the
nails. His face seemed to have spread over the bones, his gaze was opaque. He
covered his bald crown with his sparse hair, dyed a vaguely reddish color, and
when he smiled the spaces where the teeth were missing showed. At first he
tried to assume his former attitude of a man of the world, and he kept staring
at my bosom, and made allusive remarks. Then he began to complain: Nothing
is in its place, the Ten Commandments have been abolished, women, who can
restrain them, it’s all a whorehouse. But his children shut him up, ignored him,
and he was silent. After lunch he drew Alfonso into a corner—so refined, so
delicate, as good-looking in my eyes as Lila and more—to indulge his craving to
be the center of attention. Every so often I looked, incredulous, at that old
man, I thought: it’s not possible that I, I as a girl, at the Maronti was with that
foul  man,  it  can’t  really  have  happened.  Oh,  my  God,  look  at  him:  bald,
slovenly, his obscene glances, next to my so deliberately feminine classmate, a
young  woman  in  male  clothes.  And  I  in  the  same  room  with  him,  so  very
different from the me of Ischia. What time is now, what time was then.
At a certain point Donato called me over, he said politely, Lenù. And Alfonso,
too, insisted with a gesture, a look, that I join them. I went to their corner
uneasily. Donato began to praise me loudly, as if he were speaking to a vast
audience: This woman is a great scholar, a writer who has no equal anywhere
in the world; I’m proud to have known her as a girl; at Ischia, when she came to
vacation at our house she was a child, she discovered literature through her
interest in my poor verses, she read my book before going to sleep:—isn’t it
true, Lenù?
He looked at me uncertainly, suddenly a supplicant. His eyes pleaded with
me to confirm the role of his words in my literary vocation. And I said yes, it’s
true,  as  a  girl  I  couldn’t  believe  that  I  knew  personally  someone  who  had
written a book of poetry and whose thoughts were printed in the newspaper. I
thanked him for the review that a dozen years earlier he had given my first
book, I said it had been very useful. And Donato turned red with joy, he took
off, he began to celebrate himself and at the same time to complain that the
envy of mediocrities had kept him from becoming known as he deserved. Nino
had to intervene, and roughly. He brought me over to his mother again.
On the street he reproached me, saying: You know what my father’s like,
there’s no need to encourage him. I nodded, and meanwhile I looked at him out
of the corner of my eye. Would Nino lose his hair? Would he get fat? Would he
utter rancorous words against those who had been more fortunate? He was so
good-looking now, I didn’t even want to think about it. He was saying of his
father: he can’t resign himself, the older he gets the worse he is.
41.
During that same period my sister, after endless anxieties and protests, gave
birth. She had a boy whom she named Silvio, after Marcello’s father. Since our
mother was still not well I tried to help Elisa. She was white with exhaustion
and  terrified  by  the  newborn.  Seeing  her  son  all  smeared  with  blood  and
liquids had given her the impression of a small body in its death throes and she
was disgusted. But Silvio was all too alive, he wailed desperately with clenched
fists. And she didn’t know how to hold him, how to bathe him, how to take care
of the wound from the umbilical cord, how to cut his nails. Even the fact that
he was a male repulsed her. I tried to instruct her, but it didn’t last long.
Marcello, always rather clumsy, treated me immediately with an apprehension
beneath  which  I  perceived  annoyance,  as  if  my  presence  in  the  house
complicated  his  day.  And  Elisa,  too,  instead  of  being  grateful,  appeared
annoyed  by  everything  I  said,  by  my  very  generosity.  Every  day  I  said  to
myself: that’s it, I have so many things to do, tomorrow I won’t go. But I kept
going, until events decided for me.
Terrible events. One morning when I was at my sister’s house—it was very
hot and the neighborhood was dozing in the burning-hot dust; several days
earlier the station in Bologna had been blown up—a phone call came from
Peppe: our mother had fainted in the bath. I hurried to her, she was in a cold
sweat,  trembling,  she  had  an  unbearable  pain  in  her  stomach.  Finally  I
managed to make her see a doctor. Tests of various sorts followed and in a
short time a serious illness was diagnosed, an evasive term that I learned to use
immediately.  The  neighborhood  resorted  to  it  whenever  the  problem  was
cancer and the doctors did the same. They translated their diagnosis into a
similar  formula,  maybe  just  a  little  more  refined:  the  illness,  rather  than
serious, was inexorable.
My  father  at  that  news  immediately  fell  apart,  he  couldn’t  tolerate  the
situation,  and  became  depressed.  My  brothers,  their  expressions  vaguely
dazed, their complexions pasty, hovered for a while with an air of wanting to
help, and then, absorbed day and night by their mysterious jobs, disappeared,
leaving money, which was needed for doctors and medicines. As for my sister,
she stayed in her house, frightened, untidy, in her nightgown, ready to stick a
nipple  in  Silvio’s  mouth  if  he  merely  hinted  at  a  wail.  Thus,  in  the  fourth
month of my pregnancy, the full weight of my mother’s illness fell on me.
I wasn’t sorry, I wanted my mother to understand, even if she had always
tormented me, that I loved her. I became very active: I involved both Nino and
Pietro, asking them to direct me to the best doctors; I took her to the various
luminaries; I stayed with her in the hospital when she had an urgent operation,
when she was discharged. I took care of everything once I brought her home.
The heat was unbearable, and I was constantly worried. While my stomach
began to swell happily and in it grew a heart different from the one in my
breast, I daily observed, with sorrow, my mother’s decline. I was moved by her
clinging to me in order not to get lost, the way I, a small child, had clung to her
hand.  The  frailer  and  more  frightened  she  became,  the  prouder  I  was  of
keeping her alive.
At  first  she  was  as  ill-tempered  as  usual.  Whatever  I  said,  she  always
objected with rude refusals, there was nothing she didn’t claim to be able to do
without  me.  The  doctor?  She  wanted  to  see  him  alone.  The  hospital?  She
wanted to go alone. The treatments? She wanted to take care of them alone. I
don’t need anything, she grumbled, get out, you only bother me. Yet she got
angry if I was just a minute late (Since you had other things to do it was pointless to
tell  me  you  were  coming);  she  insulted  me  if  I  wasn’t  ready  to  bring  her
immediately what she asked for and she would set off with her limping gait to
show me that I was worse than Sleeping Beauty, that she was much more
energetic than I (There, there, who are you thinking about, your head’s not there,
Lenù, if I wait for you I’ll get cold); she criticized me fiercely for being polite to
doctors and nurses, hissing, If you don’t spit in their faces, those pieces of shit don’t
give a damn about you, they only help if they’re scared of you. But meanwhile inside
her something was changing. Often she was frightened by her own agitation.
She moved as if she feared that the floor might open beneath her feet. Once
when I surprised her in front of the mirror—she looked at herself often, with a
curiosity  she  had  never  had—she  asked  me,  in  embarrassment,  do  you
remember when I was young? Then, as if there were a connection, she insisted
—returning to her old violence—that I swear I wouldn’t take her to the hospital
again, that I wouldn’t let her die alone in a ward. Her eyes filled with tears.
What worried me most was that she became emotional easily: she had never
been that way. She was moved if I mentioned Dede, if she suspected that my
father had no clean socks, if she spoke of Elisa struggling with her baby, if she
looked at my growing stomach, if she remembered the countryside that had
once extended all around the houses of the neighborhood. With the illness
there  came,  in  other  words,  a  weakness  she  hadn’t  had  before,  and  that
weakness lessened her anxiety, transformed it into a capricious suffering that
frequently  brought  tears  to  her  eyes.  One  afternoon  she  burst  out  crying
because she had thought of Maestra Oliviero, although she had always detested
her.  You  remember,  she  said,  how  she  insisted  that  you  take  the  test  for
admission to middle school? And the tears poured down without restraint. Ma,
I said, calm down, what’s there to cry about? It shocked me seeing her so
desperate  for  nothing,  I  wasn’t  used  to  it.  She,  too,  shook  her  head,
incredulous, she laughed and cried, she laughed to let me know that she didn’t
know what there was to cry about.
42.
It was this frailty that slowly opened the way to an intimacy we had never
shared. At first she was ashamed of being ill. If my father or my brothers or
Elisa  and  Silvio  were  present  at  a  moment  of  weakness  she  hid  in  the
bathroom, and when they urged her tactfully (Ma, how do you feel, open the door)
she wouldn’t open it, she answered inevitably: I’m fine, what do you want, why
don’t you leave me in peace in the bathroom, at least. With me, on the other
hand,  out  of  the  blue,  she  let  go,  she  decided  to  show  me  her  sufferings
unashamedly.
It began one morning, at her house, when she told me why she was lame.
She  did  it  spontaneously,  with  no  preamble.  The  angel  of  death,  she  said
proudly, touched me when I was a child, with the exact same illness as now,
but I screwed him, even though I was just a girl. And you’ll see, I’ll screw him
again, because I know how to suffer—I learned at the age of ten, I haven’t
stopped since—and if you know how to suffer the angel respects you, after a
while he goes away. As she spoke she pulled up her dress and showed me the
injured leg like the relic of an old battle. She smacked it, observing me with a
fixed half-smile on her lips and terrified eyes.
From  then  on  her  periods  of  bitter  silence  diminished  and  those  of
uninhibited confidences increased. Sometimes she said embarrassing things.
She  revealed  that  she  had  never  been  with  any  man  but  my  father.  She
revealed with coarse obscenities that my father was perfunctory, she couldn’t
remember if sleeping with him had ever truly given her pleasure. She revealed
that she had always loved him and that she still did, but as a brother. She
revealed that the only good thing in her life was the moment I came out of her
belly, I, her first child. She revealed that the worst sin she had committed—a
sin for which she would go to Hell—was that she had never felt attached to her
other children, she had considered them a punishment, and still did so. She
revealed finally, without circumlocutions, that her only true child was me.
When  she  said  this—I  remember  that  we  were  at  the  hospital  for  an
examination—her distress was such that she wept even more than usual. She
whispered:  I  worried  only  about  you,  always,  the  others  for  me  were
stepchildren; so I deserve the disappointment you’ve given me, what a blow,
Lenù, what a blow, you shouldn’t have left Pietro, you shouldn’t have gone
with  Sarratore’s  son,  he’s  worse  than  the  father,  an  honest  man  who  is
married, who has two children, doesn’t take someone else’s wife.
I defended Nino. I tried to reassure her, I told her that there was divorce
now, that we would both get divorced and then would marry. She listened
without interrupting me. She had almost completely used up the energy with
which she once rebelled, and insisted on being right, and now she confined
herself to shaking her head. She was skin and bones, pale, if she contradicted
me she did it with the slow voice of despair.
“When? Where? Must I watch you become worse than me?”
“No, Ma, don’t worry, I’ll move forward.”
“I don’t believe it anymore, Lenù, you’ve come to a halt.”
“You’ll see, I’ll make you happy, we’ll all make you happy, my siblings and I.”
“I abandoned your brothers and sister and I’m ashamed.”
“It’s not true. Elisa has everything she wants, and Peppe and Gianni work,
have money, what more do you want?”
“I want to fix things. I gave all three of them to Marcello and I was wrong.”
Like that, in a low voice. She was inconsolable, she sketched a picture that
surprised me. Marcello is more criminal than Michele, she said, he pulled my
children into the mud, he seems the better of the two but it’s not true. He had
changed Elisa, who now felt more Solara than Greco and was on his side in
everything. She talked for hours, whispering, as if we were waiting our turn
not in the ugly, crowded waiting room of one of the best hospitals in the city
but in some place where Marcello lurked nearby. I tried to make light of it, to
calm  her,  illness  and  old  age  were  making  her  exaggerate.  You  worry  too
much, I said. She answered: I worry because I know and you don’t, ask Lina if
you don’t believe me.
It was here, on the wave of those melancholy words describing how the
neighborhood had changed for the worse (We were better off when Don Achille
Carracci was in charge), that she began to talk about Lila with an even more
marked approval than before. Lila was the only one capable of putting things
in order in the neighborhood. Lila was capable of harnessing the good and,
even more, the bad. Lila knew everything, even the most terrible acts, but she
never  condemned  you,  she  understood  that  anyone  can  make  a  mistake,
herself first of all, and so she helped you. Lila appeared to her as a kind of holy
warrior who spread avenging light over the stradone, the gardens, amid the old
buildings and the new.
As I listened it seemed to me that now I counted, in her eyes, only because of
my  relationship  with  the  neighborhood’s  new  authority.  She  described  the
friendship  between  me  and  Lila  as  a  useful  friendship,  which  I  ought  to
cultivate forever, and I immediately understood why.
“Do me a favor,” she said, “talk to her and to Enzo, see if they can take your
brothers off the street, see if they can hire them.”
I smiled at her, I smoothed a lock of gray hair. She claimed she had never
taken care of her other children, meanwhile, bent over, hands trembling, nails
white as she clutched my arm, she worried about them most of all. She wanted
to take them away from the Solaras and give them to Lila. It was her way of
remedying a tactical mistake in the war between the desire to do harm and the
desire to do good in which she had been engaged forever. Lila, I observed,
seemed to her the incarnation of the desire to do good.
“Mamma,” I said, “I’ll do everything you want, but Peppe and Gianni, even if
Lina would take them—and I don’t think she would, they’d need to study there
—would never go to work for her, they earn more with the Solaras.”
She nodded bleakly, but insisted:
“Try anyhow. You’ve been away and you’re not well informed, but here
everyone knows how Lina put down Michele. And now that she’s pregnant,
you’ll see, she’ll become stronger. The day she makes up her mind to, she’ll
crush both of the Solaras.”
43.
The months of pregnancy passed quickly for me, in spite of my worries, and
very slowly for Lila. We couldn’t avoid noting that the feelings of expecting
were very different for each of us. I said things like I’m already at the fourth
month,  she  said  things  like  I’m  only  at  the  fourth  month.  Of  course,  Lila’s
complexion soon improved, her features softened. But our bodies, although
undergoing the same process of reproducing life, continued to experience the
phases  in  different  ways,  mine  with  active  collaboration,  hers  with  dull
resignation. And even the people we dealt with were surprised at how time
hurried along for me and dragged for her.
I  remember  that  one  Sunday  we  were  walking  along  Toledo  with  the
children  and  we  ran  into  Gigliola.  That  encounter  was  important;  it  was
disturbing to me and proved that Lila really had had something to do with
Michele Solara’s crazy behavior. Gigliola was wearing heavy makeup but she
was shabbily dressed, her hair was uncombed, she flaunted her uncontainable
breasts and hips, her broad buttocks. She seemed happy to see us, she wouldn’t
let us go. She made a fuss over Dede and Elsa, she dragged us to Gambrinus, she
ordered all sorts of things, both salty and sweet, and ate greedily. She soon
forgot about my children, and they her: when she began to tell us in detail, in a
very loud voice, about all the wrongs Michele had done to her, they got bored
and, curious, went off to explore the restaurant.
Gigliola couldn’t accept the way she had been treated. He’s a beast, she said.
He went so far as to shout at her: Don’t just threaten to do it, kill yourself for
real, jump off the balcony, die. Or he thought he could fix everything with no
concern for her feelings, sticking in her bosom and in her pocket hundreds of
thousands of lire. She was furious, she was desperate. She recounted—turning
to me, because I had been away for a long time and wasn’t up to date—that her
husband had thrown her out of the house on Posillipo, kicking and hitting her,
that he had sent her to live, with the children in the old neighborhood, in two
dark  rooms.  But  the  moment  she  began  to  wish  on  Michele  all  the  most
atrocious  diseases  she  could  think  of  and  a  terrible  death,  she  switched
listeners, and addressed herself exclusively to Lila. I was amazed, she spoke to
her as if she could help her make the curses effective, she considered her an
ally. You did well, she said excitedly, to make him pay dearly for your work and
then quit. In fact, even better if you screwed him out of some money. Lucky
you, you know how to treat him, you have to keep making him bleed. She
screamed: What he can’t bear is that you don’t care, he can’t accept that the
less you see him the better off you are, well done, well done, make him go nuts
for good, make him die cursed.
At  that  point  she  drew  a  sigh  of  false  relief.  She  remembered  our  two
pregnant bellies, she wanted to touch them. She placed her broad hand almost
on my pubic bone, she asked what month I was in. As soon as I said the fourth
she exclaimed: No way you’re already in the fourth. Of Lila, on the other hand,
she said, suddenly unfriendly: There are women who never give birth, they
want to keep the child inside forever, you’re one of those. It was pointless to
remind her that we were in the same month, that we would both give birth in
January of the following year. She shook her head, she said to Lila: Just think, I
was sure you’d already had it. And she added, with an incoherent note of pain:
The more Michele sees you with that belly, the more he suffers; so make it last
a long time, you can manage, stick it in front of him, let him drop dead. Then
she  announced  that  she  had  very  urgent  things  to  do,  but  meanwhile  she
repeated two or three times that we ought to see each other more often (Let’s
reestablish the group from when we were girls, ah, how nice it was, we should have said
fuck  off  to  all  those  shits  and  thought  only  of  ourselves).  She  didn’t  even  wave
goodbye to the children, who were now playing outside, and she went off after
making some obscene remarks to the waiter, laughing.
“She’s an idiot,” Lila said, sulkily. “What’s wrong with my stomach?”
“Nothing.”
“And me?”
“Nothing, don’t worry.”
44.
It was true, nothing was wrong with Lila: nothing new. She remained the
same restless creature with an irresistible force of attraction, and that force
made her special. Every one of her affairs, for better or for worse (how she was
reacting to the pregnancy, what she had done to Michele and how she had
subdued him, how she was asserting herself in the neighborhood), continued
to seem to us more intense than ours, and it was for that reason that time for
her  seemed  to  move  slowly.  I  saw  her  frequently,  above  all  because  my
mother’s illness brought me to the neighborhood. But with a new sense of
balance. Maybe because of my public persona, maybe because of all my private
troubles, I felt more mature than Lila by now, and I was increasingly convinced
that I could welcome her back into my life, acknowledging her fascination
without suffering from it.
In those months I rushed frantically here and there, but the days flew by;
paradoxically I felt light even when I crossed the city to take my mother to a
doctor’s appointment in the hospital. If I didn’t know what to do with the
children I turned to Carmen, or sometimes even Alfonso, who had telephoned
me often to tell me I could count on him. But naturally the person in whom I
had the most confidence, the one whom Dede and Elsa went to most willingly,
was  Lila,  although  she  was  always  burdened  by  work  and  exhausted  by
pregnancy. The differences between my belly and hers were increasing. I had a
large, wide stomach, which seemed to expand sideways rather than forward;
she had a small stomach, squeezed between narrow hips, sticking out like a ball
that was about to tumble out of her lap.
As soon as I told Nino about my condition, he took me to a gynecologist who
was the wife of a colleague, and since I liked the doctor—very skilled, very
available, very different in manner and perhaps also in competence from the
gruff doctors in Florence—I had told Lila about her enthusiastically and urged
her to come with  me at least once,  to try. Now we  went together for  our
examinations, and had arranged to see her at the same time: when it was my
turn, she stood quietly in a corner, and when it was her turn, I held her hand,
because doctors still made her nervous. But the best part was in the waiting
room. In those moments I forgot about my mother’s suffering and we became
girls again. We liked sitting next to each other, I fair, she dark, I calm, she
anxious,  I  likable,  she  malicious,  the  two  of  us  opposite  and  united,  and
separate from the other pregnant women, whom we observed ironically.
It was a rare hour of joy. Once, thinking of the tiny creatures who were
defining themselves in our bodies, I remembered when—sitting next to each
other in the courtyard, as we were now in the waiting room—we played at
being mothers with our dolls. Mine was called Tina, hers Nu. She had thrown
Tina into the shadows of the cellar and I, out of spite, had done the same with
Nu. Do you remember, I asked. She seemed bewildered, she had the faint smile
of someone struggling to recapture a memory. Then, when I whispered to her,
with a laugh, how fearful we were, how bold, climbing up to the door of the
terrible Don Achille Carracci, the father of her future husband, and accusing
him of the theft of our dolls, she began to find it funny, we laughed like idiots,
disturbing  the  inhabited  stomachs  of  the  other  patients,  who  were  more
sedate.
We stopped only when the nurse called us, Cerullo and Greco: we had both
given the surnames we had had as girls. She was a large good-humored woman,
who never failed to say to Lila, touching her stomach, There’s a boy in here;
and to me, Here’s a girl. Then she showed us in and I whispered to Lila: I
already have two girls, if you really have a boy will you give it to me: and she
replied, Yes, let’s do an exchange, no problem.
The  doctor  always  found  us  in  good  health,  the  tests  were  excellent,
everything was going smoothly. Or rather—since she focused her attention on
our weight, and Lila remained as usual very thin while I tended to get fat—at
every examination she judged that Lila was healthier than me. And although
we both had many worries, on those occasions we were almost always happy to
have  found  again,  at  the  age  of  thirty-six,  a  pathway  to  affection:  though
distant in every way we were still close.
But when I went back up to Via Tasso and she hurried to the neighborhood,
the  gap  that  we  put  between  us  made  other  gaps  conspicuous.  This  new
solidarity was undoubtedly real. We liked being together, it lightened our lives.
But there was one unequivocal fact: I told her almost everything about myself,
she said almost nothing about herself. While I couldn’t not tell her about my
mother, or an article that I was writing, or problems with Dede and Elsa, or
even about my situation as a lover-wife (it was enough not to specify the lover-
wife  of  whom,  not  to  utter  the  name  of  Nino  too  often;  otherwise  I  could
confide freely), when she talked about herself, her parents, her siblings, Rino,
the  anxieties  Gennaro  caused  her,  our  friends  and  acquaintances,  Enzo,
Michele  and  Marcello  Solara,  the  entire  neighborhood,  she  was  vague,  she
didn’t seem to trust me completely. Evidently I remained the one who had
gone away, and who, even though I had returned, now had another view, lived
in upper-class Naples, could not be fully welcomed back.
45.
That I had a sort of double identity was true. Up on Via Tasso Nino brought
me his educated friends, who treated me with respect, loved my second book
in particular, wanted me to look at what they were working on. We talked late
into the night with an attitude of worldliness. We wondered if there was still a
proletariat or not, we alluded to the socialist left and, with bitterness, to the
Communists (They’re more cops than the cops and the priests), we argued about the
governability of an increasingly depleted country, some boldly used drugs, we
were sarcastic about a new illness that everyone thought was an exaggeration
of Pope John Paul II’s to block the free expression of sexuality in all its possible
versions.
But I wasn’t confined to Via Tasso; I moved around, I didn’t want to be a
prisoner of Naples. I often went to Florence with the children. Pietro, who had
long since broken politically with his father, was now—unlike Nino, who was
growing  closer  to  the  socialists—openly  Communist.  I  stayed  a  few  hours,
listening to him in silence. He sang the praises of the competent honesty of his
party, he cited the problems of the university, he informed me of the success
his book was having among academics, especially the English and Americans.
Then I set off again. I left the girls with him and Doriana and went to Milan, to
the publisher, in particular to oppose the campaign of denigration in which
Adele was persisting. My mother-in-law—the director himself had reported,
one evening when he took me to dinner—did not miss any opportunity to say
bad things about me and was labeling me with the reputation of a fickle and
unreliable person. As a result I tried to be engaging with everyone I happened
to meet at the publisher’s. I made sophisticated conversation, I was agreeable
to every request from the publicity department, I claimed to the editor that my
new book was at a good point, even though I hadn’t even started it. Then I set
off again, stopped to get the children, and slipped into Naples, readjusting to
the chaotic traffic, to the endless transactions to obtain each thing that was
mine by right, to exhausting and quarrelsome lines, to the struggle to assert
myself,  to  the  permanent  anxiety  of  going  with  my  mother  to  doctors,
hospitals, labs for tests. The result was that on Via Tasso and throughout Italy I
felt like a woman with a small reputation, whereas in Naples, especially in the
neighborhood, I lost my refinement, no one knew anything about my second
book, if injustices enraged me I moved into dialect and the coarsest insults.
The only bond between high and low seemed to me blood. There was more
and more killing, in the Veneto, in Lombardy, in Emilia, in Lazio, in Campania. I
glanced at the newspaper in the morning and sometimes the neighborhood
seemed  more  tranquil  than  the  rest  of  Italy.  It  wasn’t  true,  of  course,  the
violence  was  the  same.  Men  fought  with  each  other,  women  were  beaten,
people were murdered for obscure reasons. Sometimes, even among the people
I loved, the tension rose and tones became threatening. But I was treated with
respect. Toward me there was the benevolence that is shown to a guest who is
welcomed but mustn’t stick her nose into matters she’s not familiar with. And
in  fact  I  felt  like  an  external  observer,  with  inadequate  information.  I
constantly had the impression that Carmen or Enzo or others knew much more
than I did, that Lila told them secrets that she didn’t reveal to me.
One afternoon I was with the children in the office of Basic Sight—three
little  rooms  from  whose  windows  you  could  see  the  entrance  to  our
elementary  school—and,  knowing  I  was  there,  Carmen  also  stopped  by.  I
alluded to Pasquale out of sympathy, out of affection, even though I imagined
him  now  as  a  fighter  on  the  run,  ever  more  deeply  involved  in  infamous
crimes. I wanted to know if there was news, but it seemed to me that both
Carmen and Lila stiffened, as if I had said something reckless. They didn’t avoid
it, on the contrary, we talked for a long time about him, or rather we let
Carmen go on about her anxieties. But I had the impression that for some
reason they had decided that they couldn’t say more to me.
Two or three times I also ran into Antonio. Once he was with Lila, another, I
think, with Lila, Carmen, and Enzo. It struck me how the friendship among
them had solidified again, and it seemed surprising that he, a henchman of the
Solaras, behaved as if he had changed masters, he seemed to be working for
Lila and Enzo. Of course, we had all known each other since we were children,
but I felt it wasn’t a question of old habits. The four of them, on seeing me,
behaved as if they had met by chance, and it wasn’t true, I perceived a sort of
secret pact that they didn’t intend to extend to me. Did it have to do with
Pasquale? With the operations of the business? With the Solaras? I don’t know.
Antonio said only, on one of those occasions, but absentmindedly: you’re very
pretty with that belly. Or at least that’s the only remark of his that I remember.
Was it distrust? I don’t think so. At times I thought that, because of my
respectable  identity,  I  had  lost,  especially  in  Lila’s  eyes,  the  capacity  to
understand and so she wanted to protect me from moves that I might in my
ignorance misunderstand.
46.
Yet something wasn’t right. It was a sensation of indeterminacy, which I felt
even when everything appeared explicit and it seemed only one of Lila’s old
childish diversions: to orchestrate situations in which she let you perceive that
under the facts there was something else.
One  morning—again  at  Basic  Sight—I  exchanged  a  few  words  with  Rino,
whom I hadn’t seen for many years. He seemed unrecognizable. He was thin,
his eyes were dull, he greeted me with exaggerated affection, he even touched
me as if I were made of rubber. He talked a lot of nonsense about computers,
about the great business affairs he managed. Then suddenly he changed, he
was seized by a kind of asthma attack, and for no evident reason he began, in a
low voice, to rail against his sister. I said: Calm down, and wanted to get him a
glass of water, but he stopped me in front of Lila’s closed door and disappeared
as if he were afraid that she would reprimand him.
I knocked and went in. I asked her warily if her brother was sick. She had an
expression of irritation, she said: You know what he’s like. I nodded yes, I
thought of Elisa, I said that with siblings things aren’t always straightforward.
Meanwhile I thought of Peppe and Gianni, I said my mother was worried about
them, she wanted to get them away from Marcello Solara and had asked me to
see if she had any way of giving them a job. But those phrases—get them away
from Marcello Solara, give them a job—made her narrow her eyes, she looked at
me as if she wanted to know how far my knowledge when it came to meaning
of the words I had uttered. Since she must have decided that I didn’t know
their  real  meaning,  she  said  bitterly:  I  can’t  take  them  here,  Lenù;  Rino’s
already enough, not to mention the risks that Gennaro runs. At first I didn’t
know how to answer. Gennaro, my brothers, hers, Marcello Solara. I returned to the
subject, but she retreated, she talked about other things.
That evasiveness happened later in the case of Alfonso, too. He now worked
for Lila and Enzo, but not like Rino, who hung around there without a job.
Alfonso had become very good, they sent him to the companies they consulted
for  to  collect  data.  The  bond  between  him  and  Lila,  however,  immediately
seemed to me much stronger than anything to do with work. It wasn’t the
attraction-repulsion  that  Alfonso  had  confessed  to  me  in  the  past  but
something more. There was on his part a need—I don’t know how to put it—not
to lose sight of her. It was a singular relationship, based on a secret flow that,
moving from her, remodeled him. I was soon convinced that the closing of the
shop in Piazza dei Martiri and the firing of Alfonso had to do with that flow.
But  if  I  tried  to  ask  questions—what  happened  with  Michele,  how  did  you
manage to get rid of him, why did he fire Alfonso—Lila gave a little laugh, she
said: what can I say, Michele doesn’t know what he wants, he closes, he opens,
he creates, he destroys, and then he gets mad at everyone.
The laugh wasn’t of mockery, of contentment, or of satisfaction. The laugh
served to prevent me from insisting. One afternoon we went shopping on Via
dei Mille and since that area had for years been Alfonso’s domain, he offered to
go with us, he had a friend with a shop that would suit us. People knew by now
of his homosexuality. He continued formally to live with Marisa, but Carmen
had confirmed to me that his children were Michele’s, and she had whispered:
Marisa  is  now  Stefano’s  lover—yes,  Stefano,  Alfonso’s  brother,  Lila’s  ex-
husband, that was the new gossip. But—she added with explicit understanding
—Alfonso doesn’t give a damn, he and his wife lead separate lives and they get
on.  So  I  wasn’t  surprised  that  the  shopkeeper  friend—as  Alfonso  himself
introduced him, smiling—was a homosexual. What surprised me instead was
the game that Lila led him into.
We were trying on maternity clothes. We came out of the dressing rooms,
looked  at  ourselves  in  the  mirror,  and  Alfonso  and  his  friend  admired,
recommended,  recommended  against,  in  a  generally  pleasant  atmosphere.
Then  for  no  reason  Lila  began  to  get  restless,  scowling.  She  didn’t  like
anything, she touched her pointy stomach, she was tired, she made remarks to
Alfonso like: What are you saying, don’t give me bad advice, would you wear a
color like this?
I perceived in what was happening around me the usual oscillation between
the visible and the hidden. At a certain point Lila grabbed a beautiful dark
dress and, as if the mirror in the shop were broken, said to her former brother-
in-law: show me how it looks on me. She said those incongruous words as if
they expressed a normal request, so that Alfonso didn’t wait to be asked again,
he grabbed the dress and shut himself up in the dressing room for a long time.
I continued to try on clothes. Lila looked at me absent-mindedly, the owner
of the shop complimented every item I put on, and I waited in bewilderment
for Alfonso to reappear. When he did I was speechless. My old desk mate, with
his hair down, in the elegant dress, was a copy of Lila. His tendency to resemble
her,  which  I  had  long  noted,  came  abruptly  into  focus,  and  maybe  at  that
moment he was even handsomer, more beautiful than she, a male-female of
the type I had talked about in my book, ready, male and female, to set off on
the road leading to the black Madonna of Montevergine.
He asked Lila with some anxiety: Do you like it, this way? And the shop
owner  applauded  enthusiastically,  he  said  conspiratorially:  I  know  exactly
who’d like you, you’re beautiful. Allusions. Facts that I didn’t know and they
did. Lila had a malicious smile, she muttered: I want to give it to you. Nothing
more. Alfonso accepted it happily but nothing else was said, as if Lila had
commanded him and his friend, silently, that it was enough, I had seen and
heard enough.
47.
That  deliberate  oscillation  of  hers  between  the  obvious  and  the  opaque
struck me in a particularly painful way once—the only time—when things went
badly at one of our appointments with the gynecologist. It was November and
yet the city gave off heat as if summer had never ended. Lila felt sick on the
way, and we sat in a café for a few minutes, then went, slightly alarmed, to the
doctor. Lila explained to her in self-mocking tones that the now large thing she
had inside was kicking her, pushing her, stifling her, disturbing her, weakening
her. The gynecologist listened, amused, calmed her, said: You’ll have a son like
you, very lively, very imaginative. All good, then, very good. But before leaving
I insisted with the doctor: “You’re sure everything’s all right?”
“Very sure.”
“What’s the matter with me?” Lila protested.
“Nothing that has to do with your pregnancy.”
“What does it have to do with?”
“With your head.”
“What do you know about my head?”
“Your friend Nino was full of praise for it.”
Nino? Friend? Silence.
When we left I had to struggle to persuade Lila not to change doctors. Before
going off she said, in her fiercest tones: your lover is certainly not my friend,
but in my view he’s not your friend, either.
Here  I  was,  then,  driven  forcefully  into  the  heart  of  my  problems:  the
unreliability of Nino. In the past Lila had showed me that she knew things
about him I didn’t know. Was she now suggesting that there were still other
facts known to her and not to me? It was pointless to ask her to explain; she
left, cutting short any conversation.
48.
Afterward I quarreled with Nino for his lack of tact, for the confidences that,
although he denied it indignantly, he must surely have made to the wife of his
colleague, for everything I kept inside me and that this time, too, in the end I
stifled.
I didn’t say to him: Lila considers you a traitorous liar. It was pointless, he
would have started laughing. But the suspicion remained that that mention of
his  unreliability  alluded  to  something  concrete.  It  was  a  slow,  reluctant
suspicion, I myself had no intention of transforming it into some intolerable
certainty. And yet it persisted. So one Sunday in November, I went first to my
mother, then, around six, to Lila’s house. My daughters were in Florence with
their father, Nino was celebrating his father-in-law’s birthday with his family
(that was how I put it now: your family). I knew that Lila was alone; Enzo had
had to go and see some relatives of his in Avellino and had taken Gennaro.
The creature in my womb was nervous, I blamed the heavy air. Lila, too,
complained  that  the  baby  was  moving  too  much,  she  said  it  was  forever
creating a choppy sea in her belly. To calm him she wanted to take a walk, but I
had brought pastries; I made the coffee myself, I wanted to have a private
conversation,  in  the  intimacy  of  that  bare  house  with  windows  onto  the
stradone.
I  pretended  I  was  in  the  mood  for  idle  talk.  I  mentioned  matters  that
interested me less—Why does Marcello say you’re the ruin of his brother, what did
you do to Michele—and in a tone partly of fun, as if they were just something to
laugh about. I counted on slowly getting to the question that I really cared
about: What do you know about Nino that I don’t know.
Lila answered unwillingly. She sat down, she got up, she said her stomach
felt as if she had swallowed liters of carbonated drinks, she complained about
the smell of the cannoli, which she usually liked but which now seemed to her
bad. Marcello—you know what he’s like, she said, he’s never forgotten what I
did to him as a girl, and since he’s a coward he doesn’t say things to your face,
he acts like a good person, harmless, but he spreads gossip. Then she took the
tone she always had in that phase, affectionate and at the same time slightly
teasing: But you’re a lady, forget my troubles, tell me how your mother is. As
usual she wanted me to talk about myself, but I didn’t yield. Moving from my
mother, from her worries about Elisa and my brothers, I led her back to the
Solaras. She grumbled, she said sarcastically that men place such an enormous
importance on fucking, she laughed: not Marcello—although even he doesn’t
joke—but Michele, who went crazy, he’s been obsessed with me for a long time,
and even runs after the shadow of my shadow. She repeated that expression
allusively—shadow of my shadow—she said that was why Marcello was angry and
threatened  her,  he  couldn’t  bear  the  fact  that  she  had  put  a  leash  on  his
brother  and  led  him  in  directions  that  in  his  view  were  humiliating.  She
laughed again, she muttered: Marcello thinks he can scare me, but look, the
only person who really knew how to scare people was his mother and you
know how she ended up.
As she talked she kept touching her forehead, she complained of the heat, of
the slight headache she’d had since the morning. I understood that she wanted
to reassure me but also, in a contradictory manner, show me a little of what
was there where she lived and worked every day, behind the façade of the
houses, on the streets of the new neighborhood and the old one. Thus on the
one hand she repeatedly denied the danger, on the other drew me a picture of
spreading crime, extortion, assault, theft, usury, revenge followed by revenge.
The secret red book that Manuela maintained and that after her death had
passed to Michele was now controlled by Marcello, who was also taking away
from  his  brother—out  of  distrust—the  management  of  the  legal  and  illegal
trafficking,  the  political  friendships.  She  said  suddenly:  Marcello  has  been
bringing drugs to the neighborhood for several years, and I want to see where
it’s going to end up. A remark like that. She was very pale, fanning herself with
the edge of her skirt.
Of all her allusions, only the one to drugs struck me, particularly because of
her  tone  of  disgust  and  disapproval.  Drugs  for  me  at  that  time  meant
Mariarosa’s house, or, on certain evenings, the apartment on Via Tasso. I had
never used drugs, apart from smoking once or twice, out of curiosity, but I
wasn’t outraged if others did, in the circles I had frequented and did frequent
no one was outraged. So, to keep the conversation going, I stated an opinion,
drawing on the days in Milan, and on Mariarosa, for whom taking drugs was
one of many channels for individual well-being, a way of freeing oneself from
taboos, a cultivated form of release. But Lila shook her head in opposition:
What release, Lenù, the son of Signora Palmieri died two weeks ago, they found
him in the gardens. And I perceived the irritation she felt at that word, release,
at my way of saying it, assigning it a positive value. I stiffened, I ventured: He
must have had some heart trouble. She answered, He had heroin trouble, and
she quickly added: That’s enough, I’m fed up, I don’t want to spend Sunday
talking about the revolting activities of the Solaras.
Yet she had done so, and more than usual. A long moment slipped by. Out of
restlessness, out of weariness, out of choice—I don’t know—Lila had slightly
widened the net of her conversation, and I realized that even if she hadn’t said
much she had filled my head with new images. I had long known that Michele
wanted her—wanted her in that abstractly obsessive way that was harmful to
him—and it was clear that she had taken advantage of it by bringing him to his
knees.  But  now  she  had  evoked  the  shadow  of  her  shadow,  and  with  that
expression had thrust before my eyes Alfonso, the Alfonso who posed as a
reflection of her in a maternity dress in the store on Via dei Mille, and I had
seen Michele, a dazzled Michele, lifting his dress, holding him tight. As for
Marcello,  in  a  flash  drugs  stopped  being  what  they  had  seemed  to  me,  a
liberating game for wealthy people, and moved into the sticky theater of the
gardens beside the church, they had become a viper, a poison that spread
through the blood of my brothers, of Rino, perhaps of Gennaro, and murdered,
and brought money into the red book once kept by Manuela Solara and now—
having passed from Michele to Marcello—by my sister, in her house. I felt all
the fascination of the way Lila governed the imagination of others or set it free,
at  will,  with  just  a  few  words:  that  speaking,  stopping,  letting  images  and
emotions  go  without  adding  anything  else.  I’m  wrong,  I  said  to  myself  in
confusion,  to  write  as  I’ve  done  until  now,  recording  everything  I  know.  I
should  write  the  way  she  speaks,  leave  abysses,  construct  bridges  and  not
finish them, force the reader to establish the flow: Marcello Solara who takes
off quickly with my sister Elisa, with Silvio, with Peppe, with Gianni, with Rino,
with Gennaro, with Michele enthralled by the shadow of the shadow of Lila;
suggest that they all slip inside the veins of Signora Palmieri’s son, a boy I don’t
even know and who now causes me pain, veins far away from those of the
people Nino brings to Via Tasso, from Mariarosa’s, from those of a friend of
hers—I now remembered—who was sick, and had to detox, and my sister-in-
law, too, wherever she is, I haven’t heard from her for a long time, some people
are always saved and some perish.
I tried to expel images of voluptuous penetrations between men, of needles
in veins, of desire and death. I tried to resume the conversation but something
wasn’t right, I felt the heat of that late afternoon in my throat, I remember that
my  legs  felt  heavy  and  my  neck  was  sweaty.  I  looked  at  the  clock  on  the
kitchen wall, it was just after seven-thirty. I discovered I no longer felt like
talking about Nino, like asking Lila, sitting opposite me in a low yellowish light,
what do you know about him that I don’t know. She knew a lot, too much, she
could make me imagine whatever she wanted and I would never be able to
erase the images from my mind. They had slept together, they had studied
together, she had helped him write his articles, as I had done with the essays.
For a moment jealousy and envy returned. They hurt me and I repressed them.
Or probably what actually repressed them was a kind of thunder under the
building,  under  the  stradone,  as  if  one  of  the  trucks  that  were  constantly
passing had swerved in our direction, was descending rapidly underground
with the engine at top speed, and running into our foundations, crashing and
shattering everything.
49.
My breath was cut short, and for a fraction of a second I couldn’t understand
what was happening. The coffee cup trembled on the saucer, the leg of the
table bumped my knee. I jumped up, and realized that Lila, too, was alarmed,
she was trying to get up. The chair was tilting backward, she tried to grasp it,
but slowly, bent over, one hand reaching in front of her, in my direction, the
other extended toward the chair back, her eyes narrowing, the way they did
when she concentrated before reacting. Meanwhile thunder rumbled beneath
the building, a stormy underground wind lifted waves of a secret sea against
the floor. I looked at the ceiling; the light was swaying, along with the pink
glass cover.
Earthquake, I cried. The earth was moving, an invisible tempest exploding
under my feet, shaking the room with the howl of a forest subdued by gusts of
wind.  The  walls  creaked,  they  appeared  distended,  they  came  unstuck  and
were pasted together again at the corners. A cloud of dust rained down from
the ceiling, adding to the cloud that came out of the walls. I rushed toward the
door, shouting again: earthquake. But the movement was mere intention, I
couldn’t take a step. My feet were like lead, everything was heavy, my head,
my chest, above all my stomach. And yet the ground on which I wanted to step
was receding: for a fraction of a second it was there and then immediately it
subsided.
I remembered Lila, I sought her with my gaze. The chair had finally fallen
over, the ceiling light was swaying, the furniture—especially an old sideboard
with its knickknacks, glasses, silverware, chinoiserie—vibrated along with the
windowpanes, like weeds growing in the eaves, stirred by the breeze. Lila was
standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  leaning  forward,  head  down,  eyes
narrowed, brow furrowed, her hands holding her stomach as if she were afraid
that it would slip away from her and get lost in the cloud of plaster dust. The
seconds slid by, but nothing appeared to want to return to order; I called to
her.  She  didn’t  respond,  she  seemed  solid,  the  only  one  of  all  the  shapes
impervious to jolts, tremors. She seemed to have erased every feeling: her ears
didn’t hear, her throat didn’t inhale air, her mouth was locked, her eyelids
canceled  her  gaze.  She  was  a  motionless  organism,  rigid,  alive  only  in  the
hands that, fingers spread, gripped her stomach.
Lila, I called. I moved to grab her, drag her away, it was the most urgent
thing  to  do.  The  lower  part  of  me,  the  part  I  thought  was  exhausted  but,
instead, here it was reviving, suggested to me: maybe you should be like her,
stand still, bend over to protect your infant, don’t run away, think calmly. I
struggled to make up my mind, to reach her was difficult, and yet it was just a
step. Finally I seized her by the arm, I shook her, and she opened her eyes,
which seemed white. The noise was unbearable, the whole city was making
noise, Vesuvius, the streets, the sea, the old houses of the Tribunali and the
Quartieri, the new ones of Posillipo. She wriggled free, she cried: Don’t touch
me. It was an angry shout, and shocked me even more than the long seconds of
the  earthquake.  I  realized  that  I  was  mistaken:  Lila,  always  in  control  of
everything,  at  that  moment  wasn’t  in  control  of  anything.  She  was
immobilized by horror, fearful that if I merely touched her she would break.
50.
I dragged her outside, tugging her violently, pushing, entreating. I was afraid
the tremor that had paralyzed us would be followed immediately by another,
more  terrible,  final,  and  that  everything  would  collapse  on  top  of  us.  I
admonished  her,  I  begged  her,  I  reminded  her  that  we  had  to  rescue  the
creatures we carried in our wombs. So we flung ourselves into the wake of
terrified cries, a growing clamor joined to frenzied movements—it seemed that
the heart of the neighborhood, of the city, was about to burst. As soon as we
reached the courtyard, Lila threw up; I fought the nausea that gripped my
stomach.
The  earthquake—the  earthquake  of  November  23,  1980,  with  its  infinite
destruction—entered  into  our  bones.  It  expelled  the  habit  of  stability  and
solidity, the confidence that every second would be identical to the next, the
familiarity of sounds and gestures, the certainty of recognizing them. A sort of
suspicion of every form of reassurance took over, a tendency to believe in
every prediction of bad luck, an obsessive attention to signs of the brittleness
of the world, and it was hard to take control again. Minutes and minutes and
minutes that wouldn’t end.
Outside was worse than inside, everything was moving and shouting, we
were assaulted by rumors that multiplied the terror. Red flashes could be seen
in the direction of the railroad. Vesuvius had reawakened. The sea was beating
against Mergellina, the city hall, Chiatamone. The cemetery of the Pianto had
sunk, along with the dead, Poggioreale had collapsed entirely. The prisoners
were either under the ruins or had escaped and now were murdering people
just for the hell of it. The tunnel that led to the Marina had collapsed, burying
half the fleeing neighborhood. Fantasies fed on one another, and Lila, I saw,
believed  everything,  she  trembled  as  she  clung  to  my  arm.  The  city  is
dangerous, she whispered, we have to go, the houses are cracking, everything
is falling on us, the sewers are spurting into the air, look how the rats are
escaping.  Since  people  were  running  to  their  cars  and  the  streets  were
becoming congested, she began to pull me, she whispered, they’re all going to
the countryside, it’s safer there. She wanted to run to her car, she wanted to
get to an open space where only the sky, which seemed weightless, could fall
on our heads. I couldn’t calm her.
We reached the car, but Lila didn’t have the keys. We had fled without taking
anything, we had pulled the door shut behind us and, even if we had found the
courage, we couldn’t go back to the house. I seized one of the door handles
with all my strength and pulled it, shook it, but Lila shrieked, she put her
hands  over  her  ears  as  if  my  action  produced  intolerable  sounds  and
vibrations. Looking around, I saw a big rock that had fallen out of a wall, and
used it to break a window. I’ll get it fixed later, I said, now let’s stay here, it will
pass. We settled ourselves in the car, but nothing passed, we felt a continuous
trembling of the earth. Beyond the dusty windshield, we watched the people of
the neighborhood, who had gathered in small groups to talk. But when at last
things  seemed  quiet  someone  ran  by  shouting,  which  caused  a  general
stampede, and people slammed into our car with heart-stopping violence.
51.
I was afraid, yes, I was terrified. But to my great amazement I wasn’t as
frightened  as  Lila.  In  those  seconds  of  the  earthquake  she  had  suddenly
stripped off the woman she had been until a moment before—the one who was
able to precisely calibrate thoughts, words, gestures, tactics, strategies—as if in
that situation she considered her a useless suit of armor. Now she was someone
else. She was the person I had glimpsed the time Melina walked along the
stradone eating soap; or the one of the night of New Year’s Eve in 1958, when
the fireworks war broke out between the Carraccis and the Solaras; or the one
who had sent for me in San Giovanni a Teduccio, when she worked in Bruno
Soccavo’s factory and, thinking something was wrong with her heart, wanted
to leave me Gennaro because she was sure she would die. But now that other
person seemed to have emerged directly from the churning guts of the earth;
she bore almost no resemblance to the friend who a few minutes before I had
envied for her ability to choose words deliberately; there was no resemblance
even in the features, disfigured by anguish.
I  could  never  have  undergone  such  an  abrupt  metamorphosis,  my  self-
discipline was stable, the world existed around me, in a natural way, even in
the most terrible moments. I knew that Dede and Elsa were with their father in
Florence, and Florence was an elsewhere out of danger, which in itself calmed
me. I hoped that the worst had passed, that no house in the neighborhood had
collapsed, that Nino, my mother, my father, Elisa, my brothers were surely, like
us,  frightened,  but  surely,  like  us,  alive.  She,  on  the  other  hand,  no,  she
couldn’t  think  in  that  way.  She  writhed,  she  trembled,  she  caressed  her
stomach,  she  no  longer  seemed  to  believe  in  solid  connections.  For  her
Gennaro and Enzo had lost every connection with each other and with us, they
were destroyed. She emitted a sort of death rattle, eyes wide, she clutched
herself, held tight. And she repeated obsessively adjectives and nouns that
were  completely  incongruous  with  the  situation  we  were  in,  she  uttered
sentences without sense and yet she uttered them with conviction, tugging on
me.
For a long time it was useless for me to point out people we knew, to open
the window, wave my arms, call out to anchor her to names, to voices that
would have their own stories of that terrible experience and so draw her into
an orderly conversation. I pointed out Carmen with her husband and children,
and others, hurrying, on foot, toward the station. I pointed out Antonio with
his wife and children, I was astonished at how handsome they all were, like
characters in a film, as they calmly got into a green van, which then left. I
pointed out to her the Carracci family and their relations, husbands, wives,
fathers, mothers, people living together, lovers—that is to say Stefano, Ada,
Melina,  Maria,  Pinuccia,  Rino,  Alfonso,  Marisa,  and  all  their  children—who
appeared and  disappeared  in the  throng,  shouting continuously  for  fear of
losing each other. I pointed out Marcello Solara’s fancy car that was trying,
with a roar, to get free of the jam of vehicles; he had my sister Elisa with her
child next to him, and in the back seat the pale shadows of my mother and
father. I shouted names with the window open, I tried to involve Lila, too. But
she  wouldn’t  move.  In  fact,  I  realized  that  the  people—especially  those  we
knew well—frightened her even more, especially if they were agitated, if they
were shouting, if they were running. She squeezed my hand hard and closed
her eyes when, against all the rules, Marcello’s car went up on the sidewalk
honking and made its way amid the people who were standing there talking, or
were hauling things along. She exclaimed: Oh Madonna, an expression I had
never heard her use. What’s wrong, I asked. Gasping for breath, she cried out
that the car’s boundaries were dissolving, the boundaries of Marcello, too, at
the  wheel  were  dissolving,  the  thing  and  the  person  were  gushing  out  of
themselves, mixing liquid metal and flesh.
She used that term: dissolving boundaries. It was on that occasion that she
resorted to it for the first time; she struggled to elucidate the meaning, she
wanted me to understand what the dissolution of boundaries meant and how
much it frightened her. She was still holding my hand tight, breathing hard.
She said that the outlines of things and people were delicate, that they broke
like cotton thread. She whispered that for her it had always been that way, an
object lost its edges and poured into another, into a solution of heterogeneous
materials, a merging and mixing. She exclaimed that she had always had to
struggle to believe that life had firm boundaries, for she had known since she
was a child that it was not like that—it was absolutely not like that—and so she
couldn’t trust in their resistance to being banged and bumped. Contrary to
what  she  had  been  doing,  she  began  to  utter  a  profusion  of  overexcited
sentences, sometimes kneading in the vocabulary of the dialect, sometimes
drawing on the vast reading she had done as a girl. She muttered that she
mustn’t ever be distracted: if she became distracted real things, which, with
their violent, painful contortions, terrified her, would gain the upper hand
over the unreal ones, which, with their physical and moral solidity, pacified
her; she would be plunged into a sticky, jumbled reality and would never again
be able to give sensations clear outlines. A tactile emotion would melt into a
visual one, a visual one would melt into an olfactory one, ah, what is the real
world, Lenù, nothing, nothing, nothing about which one can say conclusively:
it’s like that. And so if she didn’t stay alert, if she didn’t pay attention to the
boundaries,  the  waters  would  break  through,  a  flood  would  rise,  carrying
everything  off  in  clots  of  menstrual  blood,  in  cancerous  polyps,  in  bits  of
yellowish fiber.
52.
She spoke for a long time. It was the first and last time she tried to explain to
me the feeling of the world she moved in. Up to now, she said—and here I
summarize in my own words, of the present—I thought it was a matter of bad
moments  that  came  and  then  passed,  like  a  childhood  illness.  Do  you
remember New Year’s Eve of 1958, when the Solaras shot at us? The shots were
the least frightening part. First, even before they started shooting, I was afraid
that  the  colors  of  the  fireworks  were  sharp—the  green  and  the  purple
especially were razorlike—that they could butcher us, that the trails of the
rockets were scraping my brother Rino like files, like rasps, and broke his flesh,
caused another, disgusting brother to drip out of him, whom I had to put back
inside right away—inside his usual form—or he would turn against me and hurt
me. All my life I’ve done nothing, Lenù, but hold back moments like those.
Marcello scared me and I protected myself with Stefano. Stefano scared me and
I protected myself with Michele. Michele scared me and I protected myself
with Nino. Nino scared me and I protected myself with Enzo. But what does
that mean, protect, it’s only a word. I could make you, now, a detailed list of all
the coverings, large and small, that I constructed to keep myself hidden, and
yet they were of no use to me. Do you remember how the night sky of Ischia
horrified me? You all said how beautiful it is, but I couldn’t. I smelled an odor
of rotten eggs, eggs with a greenish-yellow yolk inside the white and inside the
shell, a hard-boiled egg cracked open. I had in my mouth poisoned egg stars,
their light had a white, gummy consistency, it stuck to your teeth, along with
the gelatinous black of the sky, I crushed it with disgust, I tasted a crackling of
grit. Am I clear? Am I making myself clear? And yet on Ischia I was happy, full
of love. But it was no use, my head always finds a chink to peer through,
beyond—above, beneath, on the side—where the fear is. In Bruno’s factory, for
example,  the  bones  of  the  animals  cracked  in  your  fingers  if  you  merely
touched them, and a rancid marrow spilled out. I was so afraid that I thought I
was sick. But was I sick? Did I really have a murmur in my heart? No. The only
problem has always been the disquiet of my mind. I can’t stop it, I always have
to do, redo, cover, uncover, reinforce, and then suddenly undo, break. Take
Alfonso, he’s always made me nervous, ever since he was a boy, I’ve felt that
the cotton thread that held him together was about to break. And Michele?
Michele thought he was who knows what, and yet all I had to do was find his
boundary line and pull, oh, oh, oh, I broke it, I broke his cotton thread and
tangled it with Alfonso’s, male material inside male material, the fabric that I
weave by day is unraveled by night, the head finds a way. But it’s not much
use, the terror remains, it’s always in the crack between one normal thing and
the  other.  It’s  there  waiting,  I’ve  always  suspected  it,  and  since  yesterday
evening I’ve known for certain: nothing lasts, Lenù, even here in my belly, you
think the creature will endure but it won’t. You remember when I married
Stefano and I wanted the neighborhood to start again from the beginning, to
be only beautiful things, the ugliness of before was not supposed to be there
anymore. How long did it last? Good feelings are fragile, with me love doesn’t
last. Love for a man doesn’t last, not even love for a child, it soon gets a hole in
it. You look in the hole and you see the nebula of good intentions mixed up
with the nebula of bad. Gennaro makes me feel guilty, this thing here in my
belly is a responsibility that cuts me, scratches me. Loving courses together
with hating, and I can’t, I can’t manage to solidify myself around any goodwill.
Maestra Oliviero was right, I’m bad. I don’t even know how to keep friendship
alive. You’re kind, Lenù, you’ve always had a lot of patience. But tonight I
finally understood it: there is always a solvent that acts slowly, with a gentle
heat, and undoes everything, even when there’s no earthquake. So please, if I
insult you, if I say ugly things to you, stop up your ears, I don’t want to do it
and yet I do. Please, please, don’t leave me, or I’ll fall in.
53.
Yes—I kept saying—all right, but now rest. I held her tight beside me, and
finally she fell asleep. I stayed awake watching her, as she had once begged me
to do. Every so often I felt new small aftershocks, someone in a car shouted
with terror. Now the stradone was empty. The infant moved in my belly like
rolling waters, I touched Lila’s stomach, hers was moving, too. Everything was
moving: the sea of fire under the crust of the earth, and the furnaces of the
stars, and the planets, and the universes, and the light within the darkness and
the  silence  in  the  cold.  But,  even  now  as  I  pondered  the  wave  of  Lila’s
distraught words, I felt that in me fear could not put down roots, and even the
lava, the fiery stream of melting matter that I imagined inside the earthly
globe, and the fear it provoked in me, settled in my mind in orderly sentences,
in harmonious images, became a pavement of black stones like the streets of
Naples, a pavement where I was always and no matter what the center. I gave
myself weight, in other words, I knew how to do that, whatever happened.
Everything that struck me—my studies, books, Franco, Pietro, the children,
Nino,  the  earthquake—would  pass,  and  I,  whatever  I  among  those  I  was
accumulating, I would remain firm, I was the needle of the compass that stays
fixed while the lead traces circles around it. Lila on the other hand—it seemed
clear to me now, and it made me proud, it calmed me, touched me—struggled
to feel stable. She couldn’t, she didn’t believe it. However much she had always
dominated all of us and had imposed and was still imposing a way of being, on
pain of her resentment and her fury, she perceived herself as a liquid and all
her efforts were, in the end, directed only at containing herself. When, in spite
of her defensive manipulation of persons and things, the liquid prevailed, Lila
lost Lila, chaos seemed the only truth, and she—so active, so courageous—
erased herself and, terrified, became nothing.
54.
The neighborhood emptied, the stradone became quiet, the air turned cold.
In the buildings, transformed into dark rocks, there was not a single lamp
lighted, no colorful glow of a television. I, too, fell asleep. I awoke with a start,
it was still dark. Lila had left the car, the window on her side was half open. I
opened mine, I looked around. The stopped cars were all inhabited, people
coughed, groaned in their sleep. I didn’t see Lila, I grew concerned, I went
toward  the  tunnel.  I  found  her  not  far  from  Carmen’s  gas  pump.  She  was
moving amid fragments of cornices and other debris, she looked up toward the
windows of her house. Seeing me she had an expression of embarrassment. I
wasn’t well, she said, I’m sorry, I filled your head with nonsense, luckily we
were together. There was the hint of an uneasy smile on her face, she said one
of  the  many  almost  incomprehensible  phrases  of  that  night—“Luckily”  is  a
breath of perfume that comes out when you press the pump—and she shivered. She
still wasn’t well, I persuaded her to return to the car. In a few minutes she fell
asleep again.
As soon as it was day I woke her. She was calm, she wanted to apologize. She
said softly, making light of it: You know I’m like that, every so often there’s
something  that  grabs  me  here  in  my  chest.  I  said:  It’s  nothing,  there  are
periods of exhaustion, you’re looking after too many things, and anyway it’s
been terrible for everyone, it wouldn’t end. She shook her head: I know how
I’m made.
We organized ourselves, we found a way of returning to her house. We made
a great number of phone calls, but either they didn’t go through or the phone
rang in vain. Lila’s parents didn’t answer, the relatives in Avellino, who could
have given us news of Enzo and Gennaro, didn’t answer, no one answered at
Nino’s number, his friends didn’t answer. I talked to Pietro, he had just found
out about the earthquake. I asked him to keep the girls for a few days, long
enough  to  be  sure  the  danger  had  passed.  But  as  the  hours  slid  by,  the
dimensions of the disaster grew. We hadn’t been frightened for nothing. Lila
murmured as if to justify herself: You see, the earth was about to split in two.
We were dazed by emotions and by weariness, but still we walked through
the neighborhood and through a sorrowing city, now silent, now streaked by
the nagging sounds of sirens. We kept talking to alleviate anxiety: where was
Nino, where was Enzo, where was Gennaro, how was my mother, where had
Marcello Solara taken her, where were Lila’s parents. I realized that she needed
to return to the moments of the earthquake, and not so much to recount again
its traumatic effects as to feel them as a new heart around which to restructure
sensibility. I encouraged her every time, and it seemed to me that the more she
regained control of herself the more evident became the destruction and death
of entire towns of the South. Soon she began to speak of the terror without
being ashamed and I was reassured. But something indefinable nevertheless
remained: her more cautious steps, a hint of apprehension in her voice. The
memory of the earthquake endured, Naples contained it. Only the heat was
departing, like a foggy breath that rose from the body of the city and its slow,
strident life.
We reached the house of Nino and Eleonora. I knocked for a long time, I
called, no answer. Lila stood a hundred meters away, staring at me, her belly
stretched, pointed, a sulky expression on her face. I talked to a man who came
out of the entrance with two suitcases, he said that the whole building was
deserted. I stayed another moment, unable to make up my mind to leave. I
observed Lila’s figure. I remembered what she had said and implied shortly
before  the  earthquake,  I  had  the  impression  that  a  legion  of  demons  was
pursuing  her.  She  used  Enzo,  she  used  Pasquale,  she  used  Antonio.  She
remodeled Alfonso. She subdued Michele Solara, leading him into a mad love
for her, for him. And Michele was thrashing about to free himself, he fired
Alfonso, he closed the shop in Piazza dei Martiri, but in vain. Lila humiliated
him, continued to humiliate him, subjugating him. How much did she know
now of the two brothers’ business. She had set eyes on their affairs when she
collected data for the computer, she even knew about the drug money. That’s
why  Marcello  hated  her,  that’s  why  my  sister  Elisa  hated  her.  Lila  knew
everything. She knew everything out of pure, simple fear of all that was living
or dead. Who knows how many ugly facts she knew about Nino. She seemed to
say to me from a distance: Forget him, we both know that he’s safely with his
family and doesn’t give a damn about you.
55.
It  turned  out  to  be  essentially  true.  Enzo  and  Gennaro  returned  to  the
neighborhood in the evening, worn-out, overwhelmed, looking like survivors
of an atrocious war, with a single preoccupation: How was Lila. Nino, on the
other hand, reappeared many days later, as if he’d come back from a vacation. I
couldn’t understand anything, he said, I took my children and fled.
His children. What a responsible father. And the one I carried in my belly?
He said in his confident voice that he had taken refuge with the children,
Eleonora, his in-laws in a family villa in Minturno. I sulked. I kept him away for
days, I didn’t want to see him, I was worried about my parents. I heard from
Marcello himself, who had returned alone to the neighborhood, that he had
brought them to a safe place, with Elisa and Silvio, to a property he had in
Gaeta. Another savior of his family.
Meanwhile  I  returned  to  Via  Tasso,  alone.  It  was  very  cold  now,  the
apartment was freezing. I checked the walls one by one, there didn’t seem to
be  any  cracks.  But  at  night  I  was  afraid  to  fall  asleep,  I  feared  that  the
earthquake would return, and I was glad that Pietro and Doriana had agreed to
keep the children for a while.
Then Christmas came; I couldn’t help it, I made peace with Nino. I went to
Florence to get Dede and Elsa. Life began again but like a convalescence whose
end I couldn’t see. Now, every time I saw Lila, I felt on her part a mood of
uncertainty, especially when she took an aggressive tone. She looked at me as
if to say: You know what is behind my every word.
But did I really know? I crossed barricaded streets and passed by countless
uninhabitable buildings, shored up by strong wooden beams. I often ended up
in the havoc caused by the basest complicit inefficiency. And I thought of Lila,
of how she immediately returned to work, to manipulate, motivate, deride,
attack. I thought of the terror that in a few seconds had annihilated her, I saw
the  trace  of  that  terror  in  her  now  habitual  gesture  of  holding  her  hands
around her stomach with the fingers spread. And I wondered apprehensively:
who is she now, what can she become, how can she react? I said to her once, to
underline that a bad moment had passed:
“The world has returned to its place.”
She replied teasingly:
“What place?”
56.
In the last month of pregnancy everything became a struggle. Nino was
hardly ever around: he had to work, and that exasperated me. When he did
appear, he was rude. I thought: I’m ugly, he doesn’t want me anymore. And it
was true, by now I couldn’t look at myself in the mirror without disgust. I had
puffy cheeks and an enormous nose. My bosom and stomach seemed to have
consumed the rest of my body, I saw myself without a neck, with short legs and
fat ankles. I had become like my mother, but not the one of now, who was a
thin, frightened old woman; rather, I resembled the venomous figure I had
always feared, who now existed only in my memory.
That  persecuting  mother  was  unleashed.  She  began  to  act  through  me,
venting because of the difficulties, the anxieties, the pain the dying mother
was causing me with her frailties, the gaze of a person who is about to drown. I
became  intractable,  every  complication  seemed  like  a  plot,  I  often  started
shouting. I had the impression, in my moments of greatest unhappiness, that
the chaos of Naples had settled even in my body, that I was losing the capacity
to be nice, to be likable. Pietro called to talk to the children and I was brusque.
The publisher called me, or some daily paper, and I protested, I said: I’m in my
ninth month, I’m stressed, leave me alone.
With  my  daughters,  too,  I  got  worse.  Not  so  much  with  Dede,  since  she
resembled  her  father,  and  I  was  by  now  accustomed  to  her  mixture  of
intelligence, affection, and harassing logic. It was Elsa who began to upset me.
The meek little girl was becoming a being with blurry features, whose teacher
did nothing but complain about her, calling her sly and violent, while I myself,
in the house or on the street, constantly scolded her for picking fights, taking
others’ things and breaking them when she had to give them back. A fine trio
of women we are, I said to myself, it’s obvious that Nino is avoiding us, that he
prefers Eleonora, Albertino, and Lidia. When I couldn’t sleep at night because
of the creature stirring in my womb, as if it were made of mobile air bubbles, I
hoped against every prediction that the new baby would be a male, that he
would resemble Nino, that he would please him, and that Nino would love him
more than his other children.
But although I forced myself to return to the image I preferred of myself—I
had always wanted to be an even-tempered person who wisely curbed petty or
even violent feelings—in those final days I was unable to find an equilibrium. I
blamed the earthquake, which at the time didn’t seem to have disturbed me a
great  deal  but  perhaps  remained  deep  inside,  right  in  my  belly.  If  I  drove
through the tunnel of Capodimonte I was gripped by panic, I was afraid that a
new shock would make it collapse. If I took the Corso Malta viaduct, which
vibrated anyway, I accelerated to escape the shock that might shatter it at any
moment.  In  that  phase  I  even  stopped  battling  the  ants,  which  often  and
willingly appeared in the bathroom: I preferred to let them live and every so
often observe them; Alfonso claimed that they could anticipate disaster.
But it wasn’t only the aftermath of the earthquake that upset me; Lila’s
fantastical hints also entered into it. I now looked on the streets for syringes
like the ones I had absent-mindedly noticed in the days of Milan. And if I saw
some in the gardens in the neighborhood a querulous mist rose around me, I
wanted to go and confront Marcello and my brothers, even if it wasn’t clear to
me what arguments I would use. Thus I ended up doing and saying hateful
things. To my mother, who harassed me, asking if I had talked to Lila about
Peppe and Gianni, I responded rudely one day: Ma, Lina can’t take them, she
already has a brother who’s a drug addict, and she’s afraid for Gennaro, you
can’t  all  burden  her  with  the  problems  you  can’t  fix.  She  looked  at  me  in
horror, she had never alluded to drugs, I had said a word that shouldn’t be said.
But  if  in  earlier  times  she  would  have  started  shouting  in  defense  of  my
brothers and against my lack of sensitivity, now she shut herself in a dark
corner of the kitchen and didn’t breathe a word, so that I had to say, repentant:
Don’t worry, come on, we’ll find a solution.
What solution? I made things even more complicated. I tracked down Peppe
in  the  gardens—who  knows  where  Gianni  was—and  made  an  angry  speech
about how terrible it was to earn money from the vices of others. I said: Go find
any job but not this, you’ll ruin yourself and make our mother die of worry.
The whole time he was cleaning the nails of his right hand with the nail of his
left thumb, and he listened to me uneasily, eyes lowered. He was three years
younger than me and felt like the little brother in front of the big sister who
was an important person. But that didn’t keep him from saying to me, at the
end, with a sneer: Without my money Mamma would already be dead. He went
away with a faint wave of farewell.
That answer got me even more upset. I let a day or two go by and went to
see Elisa, hoping to find Marcello, too. It was very cold, the streets of the new
neighborhood were as damaged and dirty as those of the old. Marcello wasn’t
there; the house was untidy; and I found my sister’s slovenliness annoying: she
hadn’t washed or dressed, all she did was take care of her son. I almost scolded
her: Tell your husband—and I stressed that word husband even though they
weren’t married—that he’s ruining our brothers; if he has to sell drugs, let him
do it himself. I expressed myself like that, in Italian, and she turned pale, she
said: Lenù, leave my house immediately, who do you think you’re talking to, all
those fancy people you know? Get out, you’re presumptuous, you always were.
As soon as I tried to reply she shouted: Don’t ever come here again acting like
the professor about my Marcello: he’s a good person, we owe everything to
him; if I want to I can buy you, that whore Lina, and all the shits you admire so
much.
57.
I got more and more involved in the neighborhood that, because of Lila, I
had glimpsed, and realized only later that I was getting mixed up in activities
that were difficult to sort out, and was violating among other things a rule I
had made when I returned to Naples: not to be sucked back into the place
where I was born. One afternoon when I had left the children with Mirella, I
went to see my mother, and then, I don’t know whether to soothe my agitation
or to give vent to it, I went to Lila’s office. Ada opened the door, cheerfully. Lila
was closed in her room and arguing with a client, Enzo had gone with Rino to
visit some business or other, and she felt it her duty to keep me company. She
entertained me with talk about her daughter, Maria, on how big she was, how
good she was in school. But then the telephone rang, she hurried to answer,
calling to Alfonso: Lenuccia’s here, come. With a certain embarrassment, my
former schoolmate, more feminine than ever in his ways, in his hair, in the
colors of his clothes, led me into a small bare space. There to my surprise I
found Michele Solara.
I hadn’t seen him for a long time, and an unease took possession of all three
of us. Michele seemed very changed. He had gone gray, and his face was lined,
although his body was still young and athletic. But the oddest thing was that
he appeared to be embarrassed by my presence, and behaved in a completely
uncharacteristic way. First of all he stood up when I entered. Then he was
polite but said very little, his usual teasing patter had disappeared. He kept
looking at Alfonso as if he were seeking help, then immediately looked away, as
if  merely  looking  at  him  could  be  compromising.  And  Alfonso  was  just  as
uncomfortable. He kept smoothing his long hair, he smacked his lips in search
of  something  to  say,  and  the  conversation  soon  languished.  The  moments
seemed  fragile  to  me.  I  became  nervous,  but  I  didn’t  know  why.  Maybe  it
annoyed  me  that  they  were  hiding—from  me,  no  less,  as  if  I  couldn’t
understand;  from  me,  who  had  frequented  and  did  frequent  circles  more
progressive  than  that  little  neighborhood  room,  who  had  written  a  book
praised even abroad on how brittle sexual identities were. On the tip of my
tongue was the wish to exclaim: If I’ve understood correctly, you are lovers. I
didn’t do it only out of fear of having mistaken Lila’s hints. But certainly I
couldn’t bear the silence and I talked a lot, pushing the conversation in that
direction.
I said to Michele:
“Gigliola told me you’re separated.”
“Yes.”
“I’m also separated.”
“I know, and I also know you you’re with.”
“You never liked Nino.”
“No, but people have to do what they feel like, otherwise they get sick.”
“Are you still in Posillipo?”
Alfonso interrupted enthusiastically: “Yes, and the view is fabulous.”
Michele looked at him with irritation, he said: “I’m happy there.”
I answered:
“People are never happy alone.”
“Better alone than in bad company,” he answered.
Alfonso  must  have  perceived  that  I  was  looking  for  a  chance  to  say
something  unpleasant  to  Michele  and  he  tried  to  focus  my  attention  on
himself.
He exclaimed:
“And I am about to separate from Marisa.” And he related in great detail
certain quarrels with his wife on money matters. He never mentioned love,
sex, or even her infidelities. Instead he continued to insist on the money, he
spoke obscurely of Stefano and alluded only to the fact that Marisa had pushed
out Ada (Women take men away from other women without any scruples, in fact with
great satisfaction). His wife, in his words, seemed no more than an acquaintance
whose doings could be talked about with irony. Think what a waltz, he said,
laughing—Ada took Stefano from Lila and now Marisa is taking him away from
her, hahaha.
I sat listening and slowly rediscovered—but as if I were dragging it up from a
deep well—the old solidarity of the time when we sat at the same desk. Yet
only then did I understand that even if I had never been aware that he was
different, I was fond of him precisely because he wasn’t like the other boys,
precisely because of that peculiar alienation from the male behaviors of the
neighborhood. And now, as he spoke, I discovered that that bond endured.
Michele, on the other hand, annoyed me more than ever. He muttered some
vulgarities about Marisa, he was impatient with Alfonso’s conversation, at a
certain point he interrupted in the middle of a sentence almost angrily (Will
you let me have a word with Lenuccia?) and asked about my mother, he knew
she was ill. Alfonso became suddenly silent, blushing. I started talking about
my mother, purposely emphasizing how worried she was about my brothers. I
said: “She’s not happy that Peppe and Gianni work for your brother.”
“What’s the problem with Marcello?”
“I don’t know, you tell me. I heard that you don’t get along anymore.”
He looked at me almost in embarrassment.
“You  heard  wrong.  And  anyway,  if  your  mother  doesn’t  like  Marcello’s
money, she can send them to work under someone else.”
I was on the point of reproaching him for that under: my brothers under
Marcello, under him, under someone else: my brothers, whom I hadn’t helped
with school and now, because of me, they were under. Under? No human being
should be under, much less under the Solaras. I felt even more dissatisfied and
had a desire to quarrel. But Lila came out.
“Ah, what a crowd,” she said, and turned to Michele: “You need to talk to
me?”
“Yes.”
“Will it take long?”
“Yes.”
“Then first I’ll talk to Lenuccia.”
He nodded timidly. I got up, and, looking at Michele but touching Alfonso on
the arm as if to push him toward Michele, said: “One of these nights you two
must invite me to Posillipo, I’m always alone. I can do the cooking.”
Michele  opened  his  mouth  but  no  sound  came  out,  Alfonso  intervened
anxiously:  “There’s  no  need,  I’m  a  good  cook.  If  Michele  invites  us,  I’ll  do
everything.”
Lila led me away.
She stayed in her room with me for a long time, we talked about this and
that. She, too, was near the end of her term, but the pregnancy no longer
seemed to weigh on her. She said, smiling, as she placed her hand in a cup
shape under her stomach: Finally I’ve gotten used to it, I feel good, I’d almost
keep the child inside forever. With a vanity that she had rarely displayed, she
turned  sideways  to  be  admired.  She  was  tall,  and  her  slender  figure  had
beautiful curves: the small bosom, the stomach, the back and the ankles. Enzo,
she said, laughing, with a trace of vulgarity, likes me pregnant even more, how
annoying that it’ll end. I thought: the earthquake seemed so terrible to her that
each moment now is uncertain, and she would like everything to stand still,
even  her  pregnancy.  Every  so  often  I  looked  at  the  clock,  but  she  wasn’t
worried that Michele was waiting; rather, she seemed to be wasting time with
me on purpose.
“He’s not here for work,” she said when I reminded her that he was waiting,
“he’s pretending, he’s looking for excuses.”
“For what?”
“Excuses. But you stay out of it: either mind your own business, or these are
matters you have to take seriously. Even that remark about dinner at Posillipo,
maybe it would have been better if you hadn’t said it.”
I was embarrassed. I murmured that it was a time of constant tensions, I told
her about the fight with Elisa and Peppe, I told her I intended to confront
Marcello. She shook her head, she repeated: “Those, too, are things you can’t
interfere in and then go back up to Via Tasso.”
“I don’t want my mother to die worrying about her sons.”
“Comfort her.”
“How.”
She smiled.
“With lies. Lies are better than tranquilizers.”
58.
But in those low-spirited days I couldn’t lie even for a good cause. Only
because Elisa reported to our mother that I had insulted her and as a result she
wanted nothing more to do with me; only because Peppe and Gianni shouted at
her that she must never dare send me to make speeches like a cop, I finally
decided  to  tell  her  a  lie.  I  told  her  that  I  had  talked  to  Lila  and  Lila  had
promised to take care of Peppe and Gianni. But she perceived that I wasn’t
really convinced and she said grimly: Yes, well done, go home, go, you have
children. I was angry at myself, and on the following days she was even more
agitated, she grumbled that she wanted to die soon. But once when I took her
to the hospital she seemed more confident.
“She telephoned me,” she said in her hoarse, sorrowful voice.
“Who?”
“Lina.”
I was speechless with surprise.
“What did she tell you?”
“That I can stop worrying, she’ll take care of Peppe and Gianni.”
“In what sense?”
“I don’t know, but if she promised it means she’ll find a solution.”
“That’s certainly true.”
“I trust her, she knows what’s right.”
“Yes.”
“Have you seen how pretty she looks?”
“Yes.”
“She told me if she has a girl she’ll call her Nunzia, like her mother.”
“She’ll have a boy.”
“But if it’s a girl she’ll call her Nunzia,” she repeated, and as she spoke she
looked not at me but at the other suffering faces in the waiting room. I said: “I
am certainly going to have a girl, just look at this belly.”
“So?”
I forced myself to promise her: “Then I’ll give her your name, don’t worry.”
“Sarratore’s son will want to name her for his mother.”
59.
I denied that Nino had a say in it, at that stage the mere mention of him
made me angry. He had vanished, he always had something to do. But on the
day I made that promise to my mother, in the evening, as I was having dinner
with the children, he unexpectedly appeared. He was cheerful, he pretended
not to notice that I was bitter. He ate with us, he put Dede and Elsa to bed with
jokes and stories, he waited for them to fall asleep. His casual superficiality
made my mood worse. He had dropped in now, but he would leave again and
who could say for how long. What was he afraid of, that my labor would start
while he was in the house, while he was sleeping with me? That he would have
to take me to the clinic? That he would then have to say to Eleonora: I have to
stay with Elena because she is bringing my child into the world?
The girls were asleep, he came back to the living room. He caressed me, he
knelt in front of me, he kissed my stomach. It was a flash, Mirko came to mind:
how old would he be now, maybe twelve.
“What do you hear about your son?” I asked without preamble.
He didn’t understand, naturally, he thought I was talking about the child I
had in my belly, and he smiled, disoriented. Then I explained, with pleasure
breaking the promise I had long ago made to myself: “I mean Silvia’s child,
Mirko. I’ve seen him, he’s identical to you. But you? Did you acknowledge him?
Have you ever had anything to do with him?”
He frowned, he got up.
“Sometimes I don’t know what to do with you,” he murmured.
“Do what? Explain.”
“You’re  an  intelligent  woman,  but  every  so  often  you  become  another
person.”
“What do you mean? Unreasonable? Stupid?”
He gave a small laugh and made a gesture as if to brush off an annoying
insect.
“You pay too much attention to Lina.”
“What does Lina have to do with it?”
“She ruins your head, your feelings, everything.”
Those words made me lose my temper completely. I said to him: “Tonight I
want to sleep alone.”
He  didn’t  resist.  With  the  expression  of  someone  who  in  order  to  live
peacefully gives in to a serious injustice he softly closed the door behind him.
Two hours later, as I was wandering around the house, with no desire to
sleep, I felt small contractions, as if I had menstrual cramps. I called Pietro, I
knew that he still spent the nights studying. I said: I’m about to give birth,
come and get Dede and Elsa tomorrow. I had barely hung up when I felt a warm
liquid drip down my legs. I grabbed a bag that I had long since packed with
what I needed, then I kept my finger on the neighbors’ doorbell until they
answered. I had already made an arrangement with Antonella, and though she
was half asleep she wasn’t surprised. I said: “The time has come, I’m leaving
you the girls.”
Suddenly my rage and all my anxieties disappeared.
60.
It was January 22, 1981, the day my third child was delivered. Of the first two
experiences  I  didn’t  have  a  particularly  painful  memory,  but  this  one  was
absolutely the easiest, so much so that I considered it a happy liberation. The
gynecologist praised my self-control, she was happy that I hadn’t caused her
any problems. If only they were all like you, she said: You’re made for bringing
children into the world. She whispered: Nino is waiting outside, I’ve let him
know.
The  news  pleased  me,  but  I  was  even  happier  to  discover  that  my
resentments were gone. Delivering the child relieved me of the bitterness of
the past month and I was glad, I felt capable again of a good nature that could
take things less seriously. I welcomed the new arrival lovingly, she was a girl of
seven  pounds,  purple,  bald.  I  said  to  Nino,  when  I  let  him  come  in,  after
neatening myself to hide the evidence of the exertion: now we’re four females,
I’ll understand if you leave me. I made no allusion to the quarrel we had had.
He embraced me, kissed me, swore he couldn’t do without me. He gave me a
gold necklace with a pendant. I thought it was beautiful.
As soon as I felt better I called the neighbor. I learned that Pietro, diligent as
usual, had arrived. I talked to him, he wanted to come to the clinic with the
children. I had him put them on the phone, but they were distracted by the
pleasure of being with their father, and answered in monosyllables. I told my
ex-husband I would prefer that he take them to Florence for a few days. He was
very affectionate, I would have liked to thank him for his care, tell him that I
loved him. But I felt Nino’s inquiring gaze and I gave up on the idea.
Right  afterward  I  called  my  parents.  My  father  was  cold,  maybe  out  of
timidity, maybe because my life seemed to him a disaster, maybe because he
shared my brothers’ resentment at my recent tendency to stick my nose in
their business, when I had never let them meddle in mine. My mother wanted
to see the child immediately, and I struggled to calm her down. Afterward I
called Lila, she commented, amused: Things always go smoothly for you, for
me nothing’s moving yet. Maybe because she was busy with work she was
brusque, she didn’t mention a visit to the clinic. Everything normal, I thought,
good-humoredly, and fell asleep.
When I woke I took it for granted that Nino had disappeared, but he was
there. He talked for a long time with his friend the gynecologist, he asked
about acknowledgment of paternity, he showed no anxiety about Eleonora’s
possible reaction. When I said I wanted to give the baby my mother’s name he
was pleased. And as soon as I recovered we went to a city clerk to officially
register the child I had just delivered as Immacolata Sarratore.
Nino  didn’t  appear  uncomfortable  on  that  occasion,  either.  I  was  the
confused  one,  I  said  that  I  was  married  to  Giovanni  Sarratore,  I  corrected
myself, I said separated from Pietro Airota, I came out with a disorderly pile of
names, surnames, imprecise information. But the moment seemed lovely to me
and I went back to believing that, to put my life in order, I needed only a little
patience.
In those early days Nino neglected his endless duties and demonstrated in
every possible way how important I was to him. He darkened only when he
discovered that I didn’t want to baptize the child.
“Children are baptized,” he said.
“Are Albertino and Lidia baptized?”
“Of course.”
Thus I learned that, in spite of the anti-religiousness that he often flaunted,
baptism seemed necessary to him. There were moments of embarrassment. I
had thought, ever since we were in high school, that he wasn’t a believer, and
he, on the other hand, said to me that, precisely because of the argument with
the religion teacher in middle school, he was sure that I was a believer.
“Anyway,” he said, bewildered, “believer or not, children are baptized.”
“What sort of reasoning is that.”
“It’s not reasoning, it’s feeling.”
I assumed a playful tone.
“Let me be consistent,” I said. “I didn’t baptize Dede and Elsa, I won’t baptize
Immacolata. They’ll decide themselves when they grow up.”
He thought about it for a moment and burst out laughing: “Well, yes, who
cares, it was an excuse for a celebration.”
“Let’s do it anyway.”
I promised that I would organize something for all his friends. In those first
hours of our daughter’s life I observed him in every gesture, in the expressions
of disappointment and those of approval. I felt happy and yet disoriented. Was
it him? Was he the man I had always loved? Or a stranger I was forcing to
assume a clear and definite character?
61.
None of my relatives, none of my friends from the neighborhood came to
the clinic. Maybe—I thought, once I got home—I should have a little party for
them, too. I had kept my origins so far from myself that, although I spent quite
a bit of time in the neighborhood, I had never invited a single person who had
to do with my childhood and adolescence to the apartment on Via Tasso. I
regretted it, I felt that sharp separation as a residue of more fragile periods of
my life, almost a sign of immaturity. I still had that thought in mind when the
telephone rang. It was Lila.
“We’re about to arrive.”
“Who.”
“Your mother and I.”
It was a cold afternoon, Vesuvius had a dusting of snow on top, that visit
seemed ill-timed.
“In this cold? Going out will make her ill.”
“I told her but she won’t listen.”
“In a few days I’ll have a party, I’ll invite everyone, tell her she’ll see the
baby then.”
“You tell her.”
I gave up the discussion, but every idea of celebration left me, I felt that visit
as an intrusion. I had only been home for a short time. With feeding, bathing,
some sutures that bothered me, I was tired. And at that moment Nino was in
the house. I didn’t want my mother to be unhappy, and it made me uneasy that
he and Lila should meet at a moment when I wasn’t yet in shape. I tried to get
rid of Nino, but he didn’t seem to understand, in fact he seemed happy that my
mother was coming, and stayed.
I went into the bathroom to fix myself up. When they knocked I rushed to
open the door. I hadn’t seen my mother for ten days. The contrast was violent
between Lila, still carrying two lives, beautiful and energetic, and my mother,
gripping her arm like a life preserver in a storm, more bent over than ever, at
the end of her strength, close to sinking. I had her lean on me, I led her to a
chair at the window. She murmured: how beautiful the bay is. And she stared
past the balcony, maybe so as not to look at Nino. But he came over to her and
in his winning way began to point out to her the foggy outlines between sea
and sky: That’s Ischia, there is Capri, come, you can see better here, lean on me.
He never spoke to Lila, he didn’t even greet her. I talked to her.
“You’ve recovered quickly,” she said.
“I’m a little tired but I’m well.”
“You insist on staying up here, it’s hard to get here.”
“But it’s beautiful.”
“Well.”
“Come, let’s go get the baby.”
I took her into Immacolata’s room.
“You already have your looks back,” she praised me. “Your hair is so nice.
And that necklace?”
“Nino gave it to me.”
I picked the baby up from the cradle. Lila sniffed her, put her nose in her
neck, said she smelled her scent as soon as she came into the house.
“What scent?”
“Of talcum powder, milk, disinfectant, newness.”
“You like it?”
“Yes.”
“I expected her to weigh more. Evidently only I was fat.”
“Who knows what mine is like.”
She spoke of him always in the masculine now.
“He’ll be wonderful.”
She nodded yes, but as if she hadn’t heard, she was looking at the baby
carefully. She ran a finger over her forehead, one ear. She repeated the pact we
had jokingly made: “If necessary we’ll make an exchange.”
I laughed, I brought the baby to my mother, who was leaning on Nino’s arm,
near the window. She was staring up at him with pleasure, she was smiling, it
was as if she had forgotten herself and imagined that she was young.
“Here’s Immacolata,” I said.
She looked at Nino. He exclaimed quickly: “It’s a beautiful name.”
My mother murmured:
“It’s not true. But you can call her Imma, which is more modern.”
She left Nino’s arm, she gestured to me to give her her granddaughter. I did,
but fearful that she didn’t have the strength to hold her.
“Madonna, how beautiful you are,” she whispered, and turned to Lila: “Do
you like her?”
Lila was distracted, she was staring at my mother’s feet.
“Yes,” she said without taking her eyes off them. “But sit down.”
I also looked where she was looking. Blood was dripping from under my
mother’s black dress.
62.
I snatched the infant with an instinctive jerk. My mother realized what was
happening  and  I  saw  in  her  face  disgust  and  shame.  Nino  grabbed  her  a
moment  before  she  fainted.  Mamma,  mamma,  I  called  while  he  struck  her
lightly  on  one  cheek  with  his  fingertips.  I  was  alarmed,  she  didn’t  regain
consciousness, and meanwhile the baby began to wail. She’ll die, I thought,
terrified, she held out until the moment she saw Immacolata and then she let
go. I kept repeating Mamma in a louder and louder voice.
“Call an ambulance,” Lila said.
I went to the telephone, I stopped, confused, I wanted to give the baby to
Nino. But he avoided me, he turned to Lila instead, he said that it would be
quicker to take her to the hospital in the car. I felt my heart in my throat, the
baby was crying, my mother regained consciousness and began to moan. She
whispered,  weeping,  that  she  didn’t  want  to  set  foot  in  the  hospital,  she
reminded me, pulling on my skirt, that she had been admitted once and didn’t
want to die in that abandonment. Trembling, she said: I want to see the baby
grow up.
Nino at that point assumed the firm tone he had had even as a student when
he  had  to  confront  difficult  situations.  Let’s  go,  he  said  and  picked  up  my
mother in his arms. Since she protested weakly he reassured her, he told her
that he would take care of arranging everything. Lila looked at me perplexed, I
thought: the professor who attends to my mother at the hospital is a friend of
Eleonora’s family, Nino at this moment is indispensable, lucky he’s here. Lila
said, leave me the baby, you go. I agreed, I was about to hand her Immacolata
but with a hesitant gesture, I was connected to her as if she were still inside
me. And, anyway, I couldn’t separate myself now, I had to feed her, bathe her.
But to my mother, too, I felt bound as never before, I was shaking, what was
that blood, what did it mean.
“Come on,” Nino said impatiently to Lila, “hurry up.”
“Yes,” I said, “go and let me know.”
Only when the door closed did I feel the wound of that situation: Lila and
Nino together were taking my mother away, they were taking care of her when
it should have been me.
I felt weak and confused. I sat on the couch, giving my breast to Immacolata
to soothe her. I couldn’t take my eyes off the blood on the floor as I imagined
the car speeding over the frozen streets of the city, the handkerchief outside
the window signaling an emergency, the finger on the horn, my mother dying
in the back seat. The car was Lila’s, was she driving or had he gotten behind the
wheel? I have to stay calm, I said to myself.
I placed the baby in the cradle, and decided to call Elisa. I minimized what
had happened, I was silent about Nino, I mentioned Lila. My sister immediately
lost her temper, burst out crying, insulted me. She shouted that I had sent our
mother  who  knows  where  with  a  stranger,  that  I  should  have  called  an
ambulance, that I thought only of my own affairs and convenience, that if our
mother died I was responsible. Then I heard her calling Marcello repeatedly in
a commanding tone unfamiliar to me, petulant yet anguished cries. I said to
her: What does “who knows where” mean, Lina took her to the hospital, why
must you speak like that. She slammed down the telephone.
But  Elisa  was  right.  I  had  lost  my  head.  I  really  should  have  called  an
ambulance. Or torn the baby away and given her to Lila. I was subject to Nino’s
authority, to that craving of men to make a good impression by appearing
determined, saviors. I waited by the telephone for them to call me.
An hour passed, an hour and a half, finally the phone rang. Lila said calmly:
“They  admitted  her.  Nino  knows  the  doctors,  they  told  him  it’s  all  under
control. Be calm.”
“Is she alone?”
“Yes, they won’t let anyone in.”
“She doesn’t want to die alone.”
“She won’t die.”
“She’s frightened, Lila, do something, she’s not what she used to be.”
“That’s how the hospital works.”
“Did she ask about me?”
“She said you should bring her the baby.”
“What are you doing now?”
“Nino is still with the doctors, I’m going.”
“Go, yes, thank you, don’t get tired.”
“He’ll phone as soon as he can.”
“O.K.”
“And stay calm, otherwise your milk won’t come.”
That allusion to the milk helped me. I sat next to Immacolata’s cradle as if
her  nearness  could  preserve  my  swollen  breasts.  What  was  the  body  of  a
woman: I had nourished my daughter in the womb, now that she was out she
was nourished by my breast. I thought, there was a moment when I, too, had
been in my mother’s womb, had sucked at her breast. A breast as big as mine,
or maybe even bigger. Until shortly before my mother got sick my father had
often alluded obscenely to that bosom. I had never seen her without a bra, in
any stage of her life. She had always concealed herself, she didn’t trust her
body because of the leg. Yet at the first glass of wine she would counter my
father’s  obscenities  with  words  just  as  coarse  in  which  she  boasted  of  her
attractions, an exhibition of shamelessness that was pure show. The telephone
rang again and I hurried to answer. It was Lila again, now she had a curt tone.
“There’s trouble here, Lenù.”
“Is she worse?”
“No,  the  doctors  are  confident.  But  Marcello  showed  up  and  he’s  acting
crazy.”
“Marcello? What does Marcello have to do with it?”
“I don’t know.”
“Let me talk to him.”
“Wait, he’s arguing with Nino.”
I recognized in the background Marcello’s thick voice, loaded with dialect,
and Nino’s, in good Italian, but strident, which happened when he lost his
temper.
“Tell Nino to forget it, in fact send him away.”
Lila didn’t answer, I heard her join a discussion that I was ignorant of and
then suddenly shout in dialect: What the fuck are you saying, Marcè, go fuck
yourself, get out. Then she shouted at me: Talk to this shit, please, you two
come to an agreement, I don’t want to get involved. Distant voices. After a few
seconds Marcello came to the phone. He said, trying to assume a polite tone,
that Elisa had insisted that we not leave our mother in the hospital and that he
had come to get her and take her to a nice clinic in Capodimonte. He asked as if
he seriously sought my permission: “Am I right? Tell me if I’m right.”
“Calm down.”
“I’m calm, Lenù. But you gave birth in a clinic, Elisa gave birth in a clinic:
why should your mother die here?”
I said uneasily:
“The doctors who are taking care of her work there.”
He became aggressive as he had never been toward me: “The doctors are
where the money is. Who’s in charge here, you, Lina, or that shit?”
“It’s not a question of being in charge.”
“Yes, it is. Either tell your friends that I can take her to Capodimonte or I’ll
break someone’s face and take her all the same.”
“Give me Lina,” I said.
I had trouble standing up, my temples were pounding. I said: Ask Nino if my
mother can be moved, make him talk to the doctors, then call me back. I hung
up wringing my hands, I didn’t know what to do.
A few minutes went by and the phone rang again. It was Nino.
“Lenù, control that beast, otherwise I’ll call the police.”
“Did you ask the doctors if my mother can be moved?”
“No, she can’t be moved.”
“Nino, did you ask or not? She doesn’t want to stay in the hospital.”
“Private clinics are even more disgusting.”
“I know, but calm down.”
“I’m perfectly calm.”
“All right, but come home now.”
“And here?”
“Lina will take care of it.”
“I can’t leave Lina with that guy.”
I raised my voice:
“Lina can take care of herself. I can’t stand up, the baby’s crying, I have to
bathe her. I told you, come home right now.”
I hung up.
63.
Those  were  difficult  hours.  Nino  arrived  distraught,  he  was  speaking  in
dialect,  he  was  extremely  nervous,  he  repeated:  Now  let’s  see  who  wins.  I
realized that my mother’s admission to the hospital had become for him a
question of principle. He was afraid that Solara really would take her to some
unsuitable  place,  one  of  those  which  operate  just  to  make  money.  In  the
hospital,  he  exclaimed,  returning  to  Italian,  your  mother  has  high-level
specialists  available,  professors  who,  in  spite  of  the  advanced  stage  of  the
illness, have so far kept her alive in a dignified way.
I  shared  his  fears,  and  he  took  the  matter  to  heart.  Although  it  was
dinnertime he telephoned important people, names well known in Naples at
the time, I don’t know if to complain or to gain support in a possible battle
against Marcello’s aggression. But I could hear that as soon as he uttered the
name  Solara  the  conversation  became  complicated,  and  he  was  silent,
listening. He calmed down only around ten. I was in despair, but I tried not to
let  him  see  it,  so  that  he  wouldn’t  decide  to  go  back  to  the  hospital.  My
agitation spread to Immacolata. She wailed, I nursed her, she was quiet, she
wailed again.
I didn’t close my eyes. The telephone rang again at six in the morning, I
rushed to answer hoping that neither the baby nor Nino would wake up. It was
Lila, she had spent the night in the hospital. She gave me the report in a tired
voice.  Marcello  had  apparently  given  in,  and  had  left  without  even  saying
goodbye to her. She had sneaked through stairways and corridors, had found
the ward where they had brought my mother. It was a room of agony, there
were five other suffering women, they groaned and cried, all abandoned to
their suffering. She had found my mother, who, motionless, eyes staring, was
whispering at the ceiling, Madonna, let me die soon, her whole body shaking
with the effort of enduring the pain. Lila had squatted beside her, had calmed
her.  Now  she  had  had  to  get  out  because  it  was  day  and  the  nurses  were
beginning to show up. She was pleased at how she had violated all the rules;
she always enjoyed disobedience. But in that circumstance it seemed to me
that she was pretending, in order not to make me feel the weight of the effort
she  had  undertaken  for  me.  She  was  close  to  giving  birth,  I  imagined  her
exhausted, tortured by her own needs. I was worried about her at least as
much as about my mother.
“How do you feel?”
“Fine.”
“Sure?”
“Very sure.”
“Go and sleep.”
“Not until Marcello arrives with your sister.”
“You’re sure they’ll be back?”
“As if they would give up making a scene.”
While I was on the phone Nino appeared, sleepy. He listened for a while,
then said: “Let me speak to her.”
I  didn’t  hand  him  the  phone,  I  muttered:  She  already  hung  up.  He
complained, he said he had mobilized a series of people to ensure that my
mother would have the best care possible and he wanted to know if there had
been any result of his interest. For now, no, I answered. We made a plan for
him to take me to the hospital with the baby, even though there was a strong,
cold wind. He would stay in the car with Immacolata and I would go to my
mother between feedings. He said all right, and his helpfulness softened me
toward him, then annoyed me, because he had taken care of everything except
the practicality of noting the visiting hours. I called to find out, we carefully
bundled up the baby, and went. Lila hadn’t been heard from; I was sure we
would find her in the hospital. But when we arrived we found that not only was
she not there but neither was my mother. She had been discharged.
64.
I learned later from my sister what had happened. She told me as if she were
saying: You give yourself a lot of airs, but without us you are no one. At exactly
nine Marcello had arrived at the hospital with some head physician—he had
taken the trouble himself to pick him up at home in the car. Our mother had
been immediately transferred by ambulance to the Capodimonte clinic. There,
Elisa said, she’s like a queen, we relatives can stay as much as we want, there’s
a  bed  for  Papa,  who  will  keep  her  company  at  night.  And  she  specified,
contemptuously: Don’t worry, we’ll pay for it. What followed was explicitly
threatening. Maybe your friend the professor, she said, doesn’t understand
who he’s dealing with, you’d better explain it to him. And tell that shit Lina
that she may be very intelligent, but Marcello has changed, Marcello isn’t her
little boyfriend from long ago, and he’s not like Michele, whom she twists
around her little finger: Marcello said that if she raises her voice again with
me, if she insults me the way she did in front of everyone in the hospital, he’ll
kill her.
I didn’t report anything to Lila and I didn’t even want to know in what terms
she had quarreled with my sister. But in the days that followed I became more
affectionate, I telephoned often to let her know that I was grateful, that I loved
her and couldn’t wait until she, too, gave birth.
“Everything all right?” I asked.
“Yes.”
“Nothing moving?”
“Of course not. Do you want help today?”
“No, tomorrow if you can.”
The days were intense, with a complicated adding up of old restraints and
new.  My  whole  body  was  still  in  symbiosis  with  Imma’s  tiny  organism,  I
couldn’t separate from her. But I also missed Dede and Elsa, so I telephoned
Pietro and he finally brought them back. Elsa immediately pretended to love
her new little sister dearly, but she didn’t hold out for long, in a few hours she
began to make faces of disgust at her, she said: You made her really ugly. Dede,
on the other hand, wanted to prove that she could be a much more capable
mamma than I was and was in constant danger of dropping her or drowning
her in the bath.
I needed a lot of help, at least in those early days, and I have to say that
Pietro offered it. He, who as a husband had barely exerted himself to make
things easier, now that we were officially separated didn’t want to leave me
alone with three children, one of whom was a newborn, and offered to stay for
a few days. But I had to send him away, and not because I didn’t want his help
but because during the few hours he was in Via Tasso Nino harassed me, he
kept calling to find out if Pietro had gone and if he could come to his house
without being forced to meet him. Naturally when my ex-husband left Nino
was overwhelmed by his job and his political engagements, so I was on my
own: in order to shop, take the children to school, pick them up, read a book or
write a few lines, I had to leave Imma with the neighbor.
But that was the least of it. Much more complicated was arranging to go and
see my mother in the clinic. I didn’t trust Mirella, two children and a newborn
seemed too much for her. So I decided to take Imma with me. I bundled her up,
called a taxi, and was driven to Capodimonte, taking advantage of the time
when Dede and Elsa were in school.
My mother had recovered. Of course, she was frail, and if she didn’t see us
children every day she feared catastrophe and began to cry. Also, she was
permanently in bed, while before, even if laboriously, she had moved, gone
out. But it seemed indisputable that the luxuries of the clinic were beneficial to
her. To be treated like a great lady became a game that distracted her from the
illness and that, with the help of some drug, diminished the pain, making her
at times euphoric. She liked the large luminous room, she found the mattress
comfortable, she was proud of having her own bathroom, and in the room, no
less. A real bathroom—she pointed out—not a toilet, and she wanted to get up
and show it to me. Not to mention that there was the new granddaughter.
When I went with Imma to see her she held the baby next to her, talked to her
in baby talk, grew excited, claiming—which was very unlikely—that Imma had
smiled at her.
But in general her interest in the infant didn’t last long. She began to speak
of her own childhood, of adolescence. She went back to when she was five,
then she slid to twelve, then fourteen, and she related to me from within those
ages things that had happened to her and her companions of that time. One
morning she said to me in dialect: As a child I knew about death, I’ve always
known about it, but I never thought it would happen to me, and even now I
can’t believe it. Another time, following her own thoughts, she began to laugh,
and whispered: You’re right not to baptize the baby, it’s nonsense; now that
I’m dying I know that I’ll turn into little bits and pieces. But mostly it was in
those slow hours that I truly felt I was her favorite child. When she embraced
me before I left, it was as if she meant to slip inside me and stay there, as once I
had been inside her. That contact with her body, which had irritated me when
she was healthy, I now liked.
65.
It was odd how the clinic soon became a place of meeting for the old and the
young of the neighborhood.
My father slept there with my mother, and when I saw him in the morning
his beard was unshaven, his eyes were frightened. We barely greeted each
other, but that didn’t seem unusual. I had never had much contact with him: at
times affectionate, often distracted, occasionally in support of me against my
mother. But it had almost always been superficial. My mother had given him a
role and taken it away according to convenience, and especially when it came
to me—making and unmaking my life was to be only for her—she had pushed
him  into  the  background.  Now  that  the  energy  of  his  wife  had  almost
completely vanished, he didn’t know how to talk to me nor I to him. I said hi,
he  said  hi,  then  he  added:  while  you  keep  her  company,  I’ll  go  smoke  a
cigarette. Sometimes I wondered how he had managed to survive, a man so
ordinary, in the fierce world he had moved in, in Naples, in his job, in the
neighborhood, even at home.
When Elisa arrived with her baby I saw that there was a greater intimacy
between  her  and  our  father.  Elisa  treated  him  with  affectionate  authority.
Often she stayed all day and sometimes all night, sending him home to sleep in
his own bed. As soon as she arrived, my sister had to criticize everything, the
dust, the windows, the food. She did it to make herself respected, she wanted it
to be clear that she was in charge. And Peppe and Gianni matched her. When
they felt my mother was suffering and my father desperate, both would get
upset,  press  the  bell,  call  the  nurse.  If  the  nurse  delayed,  my  brothers
reprimanded her harshly and then, contradicting themselves, gave her lavish
tips. Gianni especially, before leaving, would stick some money in her pocket,
saying: Stay right outside the door and hop up as soon as Mamma calls you,
have  your  coffee  when  you’re  off  duty,  is  that  clear?  Then,  to  let  it  be
understood that our mother was a person of consequence, he would mention
three or four times the name of the Solaras. Signora Greco—he would say—is
the Solaras’ business.
The  Solaras’  business.  Those  words  enraged  me,  I  was  ashamed.  But
meanwhile  I  thought,  either  this  or  the  hospital,  and  I  said  to  myself:  but
afterward (what I meant by afterward I didn’t admit even to myself) I’ll have to
clear up a lot of things with my siblings and with Marcello. For now it gave me
pleasure to arrive in the room and find my mother with her friends from the
neighborhood, all her contemporaries, to whom she boasted weakly, saying
things  like,  My  children  wanted  it  like  this,  or,  pointing  to  me:  Elena  is  a
famous writer, she has a house on Via Tasso from which the sea is visible, look
what a beautiful baby, she’s called Immacolata, like me. When her friends left,
murmuring, Sleep, I went in to check on her, then returned with Imma to the
corridor, where the air seemed fresher. I left the door of the room open so I
could monitor my mother’s heavy breathing; after the fatigue of those visits,
she often fell asleep and groaned in her sleep.
Occasionally the days were simpler. Carmen, for example, sometimes came
to get me in her car. And Alfonso did the same. Naturally it was a sign of
affection for me. They spoke respectfully to my mother, at most they gave her
some satisfaction by praising her granddaughter and the comfort of the room.
The  rest  of  the  time  they  spent  either  talking  in  the  corridor  with  me  or
waiting outside, in the car, to be in time to take me to pick up the girls at
school. The mornings with them were always intense and created a curious
effect: they brought together the neighborhood of my mother, now near its
end, and the one being constructed under Lila’s influence.
I  told  Carmen  what  our  friend  had  done  for  my  mother.  She  said  with
satisfaction: You know no one can stop Lina, and she spoke of her as if she
attributed to her magical powers. But I learned more from a quarter of an hour
spent with Alfonso in the spotless corridor of the clinic, while the doctor was
with my mother. He, too, usually, was inflamed with gratitude toward Lila, but
what struck me was that for the first time he talked explicitly about himself.
He said: Lina taught me a job with a great future. He exclaimed: Without her
what would I have been, nothing, a piece of living flesh, without fulfillment. He
compared Lila with his wife’s behavior: I left Marisa free to betray me as much
as she wanted, I gave my name to her children, but just the same she’s angry at
me, she tormented me and torments me, she has spit in my face countless
times, she says I cheated her. He defended himself: How did I cheat, Lenù,
you’re an intellectual and you can understand me, the one who was cheated
was me, cheated by myself, and if Lina hadn’t helped me I would have died
cheated. His eyes were shining. The most beautiful thing she did for me was to
impose clarity on me, teach me to say: If I touch the bare foot of this woman I
feel nothing, while I die of desire if I touch the foot of that man, there, and
caress his hands, cut his nails with scissors, squeeze his blackheads, be with
him on a dance floor and say to him, If you know how to waltz lead me, let me
feel how well you lead. He recalled faraway events: Do you remember when
you and Lina came to my house to ask my father to give you back the dolls and
he called me, he asked, teasing, Alfò, did you take them—because I was the
shame of the family, I played with my sister’s dolls and I tried on Mamma’s
necklaces? He explained to me, but as if I already knew everything and was
useful only in enabling him to express his true nature. Even as a child, he said, I
knew I wasn’t what the others thought but not what I thought, either. I said to
myself: I’m another thing, a thing that is hidden in the veins, it has no name
and waits. But I didn’t know what that thing was and especially I didn’t know
how it could be me, until Lila forced me—I don’t know how to say it—to take a
little  of  her.  You  know  what  she’s  like,  she  said:  start  here  and  see  what
happens; so we were mixed up—it was a lot of fun—and now I’m not what I was
and I’m not Lila, either, but another person who is slowly defining himself.
He was happy to share these confidences and I was happy, too, that he made
them. A new intimacy arose between us, different from when we used to walk
home  from  school.  And  with  Carmen,  too,  I  had  the  impression  that  our
relationship  was  becoming  more  trusting.  Then  I  realized  that  both,  if  in
different ways, were asking something more of me. It happened twice, both
times connected to Marcello’s presence in the clinic.
My sister Elisa and her baby were usually driven to the clinic by an old man
named Domenico. Domenico left them there and drove our father back to the
neighborhood. But sometimes it was Marcello himself who brought Elisa and
Silvio. One morning when he appeared in person Carmen was there with me. I
was  sure  there  would  be  tensions  between  them,  but  they  exchanged  a
greeting that wasn’t warm but not confrontational, either, and she hovered
around him like an animal ready to approach at the first hint of favor. Once we
were  alone  she  confided  to  me  nervously,  in  a  low  voice,  that  even  if  the
Solaras  hated  her  she  was  trying  to  be  friendly  and  she  did  it  for  love  of
Pasquale.  But—she  exclaimed—I  can’t  do  it,  Lenù,  I  hate  them,  I  want  to
strangle them, it’s only out of necessity. Then she asked: How would you act in
my place?
Something similar happened with Alfonso. One morning when he took me to
see my mother, Marcello appeared and Alfonso panicked just at the sight of
him.  And  yet  Solara  behaved  just  as  he  usually  did:  he  greeted  me  with
awkward politeness, and gave Alfonso a nod, pretending not to see the hand
that he had mechanically extended. To avoid friction I pushed my friend into
the hall with the excuse that I had to nurse Imma. Once outside the room
Alfonso muttered: If they murder me, remember it was Marcello. I said: Don’t
exaggerate.  But  he  was  tense,  he  began  sarcastically  to  make  a  list  of  the
people in the neighborhood who would gladly kill him, people I didn’t know
and people I knew. On the list he put his brother Stefano (he laughed; he fucks
my wife only to demonstrate that we’re not all fags in the family) and also Rino (he
laughed; ever since he realized I’m able to look like his sister, he would do to me what
he can’t do to her). But at the top he always left Marcello, according to him it was
Marcello who hated him most. He said it with satisfaction and yet anguish: he
thinks  Michele  went  mad  because  of  me.  And  he  added,  sneering:  Lila
encouraged me to be like her, she likes the effort I make, she likes to see how I
distort her, she’s pleased with the effect that this distortion has on Michele,
and I’m pleased, too. Then he stopped, he asked me: What do you think?
I listened, nursing the baby. He and Carmen were not satisfied that I lived in
Naples, that every so often we met: they wanted me to be fully reintegrated
into the neighborhood, they asked me to stand beside Lila as a guardian deity,
they  urged  that  we  act  as  divinities  at  times  in  agreement,  at  times  in
competition,  but  in  any  case  attentive  to  their  problems.  That  request  for
greater involvement in their affairs, which in her way Lila, too, often made and
which in general seemed an inappropriate pressure, in that situation moved
me, I felt that it reinforced the tired voice of my mother when she proudly
pointed me out to her friends of the neighborhood as an important part of
herself. I hugged Imma to my breast and adjusted the blanket to protect her
from the drafts.
66.
Only Nino and Lila never came to the clinic. Nino was explicit: I have no
desire to meet that Camorrist, I’m sorry for your mother, give her my best, but
I  can’t  go  with  you.  Sometimes  I  convinced  myself  that  it  was  a  way  of
justifying his disappearances, but more often he seemed truly hurt, because he
had gone to a lot of trouble for my mother and then I and my whole family had
ended up going along with the Solaras. I explained to him that it was a difficult
system. I said: It doesn’t have to do with Marcello, we only agreed to what
made  our  mother  happy.  But  he  grumbled:  that’s  why  Naples  will  never
change.
As for Lila, she said nothing about the move to the clinic. She continued to
help me out even though she was about to give birth herself at any moment. I
felt guilty. I said: Don’t worry about me, you should look after yourself. But no
—she answered pointing to her stomach with an expression between sarcasm
and alarm—he’s late, I don’t want to and he doesn’t want to. And as soon as I
needed something she hurried over. Naturally, she never offered to drive me to
Capodimonte, as Carmen and Alfonso did. But if the children had a fever and I
couldn’t send them to school—as happened several times in Immacolata’s first
three weeks of life, which were cold and rainy—she was available, she left the
job to Enzo and Alfonso, she came up to Via Tasso to take all three of them.
I was glad; the time Dede and Elsa spent with Lila was always valuable. She
was  able  to  bring  the  two  sisters  closer  to  the  third,  making  Dede  take
responsibility, keeping Elsa under control, soothing Imma without sticking the
pacifier in her mouth, as Mirella did. The only problem was Nino. I was afraid I
would discover that—though he was always busy when I was alone—he had
miraculously managed to find time to help Lila when she was with the girls.
And so in a hidden corner of myself I was never really serene. Lila arrived, I
gave her endless advice, I wrote down the number of the clinic, I alerted my
neighbor just in case, I hurried to Capodimonte. I stayed with my mother no
longer than an hour and then I slipped away to get home in time for nursing,
for cooking. But sometimes, on the way home, I’d have a flash of entering the
house and finding Nino and Lila together, talking about everything under the
sun, as they used to do in Ischia. I also tended, naturally, to more intolerable
fantasies,  but  I  repressed  them,  horrified.  The  most  persistent  fear  was  a
different one, and, while I drove, it appeared to me the most well founded. I
imagined that her labor would begin while Nino was there, so that he would
have to take her to the emergency room, leaving Dede to play, terrified, the
part of the sensible woman, Elsa to rummage in Lila’s bag and steal something,
Imma to wail in her cradle, tormented by hunger and diaper rash.
Something like that did happen, but Nino had no part in it. I returned home
one morning, punctual, within the half hour, and discovered that Lila wasn’t
there;  her  labor  had  begun.  An  intolerable  anguish  seized  me.  More  than
anything she feared the shaking and bending of matter, she hated illness in
any form, she detested the hollowness of words when they were emptied of
any possible meaning. So I prayed that she would hold up.
67.
I know about the birth from two sources, her and the gynecologist. Here I’ll
put down the stories in succession and summarize the situation in my own
words. It was raining. I had given birth three weeks earlier. My mother had
been in the clinic for a couple of weeks and, if I didn’t appear, she wept like an
anxious child. Dede had a slight fever, Elsa refused to go to school, insisting
that she wanted to take care of her sister. Carmen wasn’t available, nor was
Alfonso. I called Lila, I set out the usual conditions: If you don’t feel well, if you
have to work, forget it, I’ll find another solution. She replied in her teasing way
that she felt very well and that when you’re the boss you give the orders and
take all the time off you want. She loved the two girls, but she especially liked
taking care of Imma with them; it was a game that made all four of them
happy. I’m leaving right away, she said. I figured that she would arrive in an
hour at most, but she was late. I waited a while, but since I knew that she
would keep her promise, I said to the neighbor: It’s a matter of minutes, and
left the children with her to go to my mother.
But Lila was late because of a sort of presentiment in her body. Although she
wasn’t having contractions she didn’t feel well and, finally, as a precaution, had
Enzo take her to my house. Even before she went in she felt the first pains. She
immediately called Carmen, ordering her to come and give the neighbor a
hand, then Enzo took her to the clinic where our gynecologist worked. The
contractions suddenly became violent but not decisive: the labor lasted sixteen
hours.
Lila’s account was almost funny. It’s not true, she said, that you suffer only
with  the  first  child  and  afterward  it’s  easier—you  always  suffer.  And  she
brought out arguments as fierce as they were humorous. It seemed to her
pointless to safeguard the child in your womb and at the same time long to get
rid of it. It’s ridiculous, she said, that this exquisite nine months of hospitality
is accompanied by the desire to throw out the guest as violently as possible.
She shook her head indignantly at the inconsistency of the mechanism. It’s
crazy, she exclaimed, resorting to Italian, it’s your own body that’s angry with
you, and in fact rebels against you until it becomes its own worst enemy, until
it achieves the most terrible pain possible. For hours she had felt in her belly
sharp cold flames, an unbearable flow of pain that hit her brutally in the pit of
her stomach and then returned, penetrating her kidneys. Come on, she said
sarcastically, you’re a liar, where is the great experience. And she swore—this
time seriously—that she would never get pregnant again.
But according to the gynecologist, whom Nino invited to dinner one night
with her husband, the delivery had been normal, any other woman would have
given birth without all that talk. What complicated it was only Lila’s teeming
head. The doctor had been very irritated. You’re doing the opposite of what
you should, she had reprimanded her, you hold on when instead you should
push: go on, go, push. According to her—she now felt an open aversion toward
her patient, and there in my house, at dinner, she didn’t hide it but, rather,
displayed it in a conspiratorial way, especially to Nino—Lila had done her best
not to bring her infant into the world. She held onto it with all her strength
and meanwhile gasped: Cut my stomach open, you get it out, I can’t do it.
When the gynecologist continued to encourage her, Lila shouted vulgar insults
at  her.  She  was  soaked  in  sweat,  the  gynecologist  told  us,  her  eyes  were
bloodshot below her broad forehead, and she was screaming: You talk, you give
orders, you come here and do it, you piece of shit, you push the baby out if you
can, it’s killing me.
I was annoyed and I said to the doctor: You shouldn’t tell us these things.
She became even more irritated, she exclaimed: I’m telling you because we’re
among friends. But then, stung, she assumed the tone of the doctor and said
with an affected seriousness that if we loved Lila we should (she meant Nino
and me, obviously) help her concentrate on something that truly gave her
satisfaction,  otherwise,  with  her  dancing  brain  (she  used  precisely  that
expression), she would get herself and those around her in trouble. Finally, she
repeated that in the delivery room she had seen a struggle against nature, a
terrible  clash  between  a  mother  and  her  child.  It  was,  she  said,  a  truly
unpleasant experience.
The infant was a girl, a girl and not a boy as everyone had predicted. When I
was able to go to the clinic, Lila, although she was exhausted, showed me her
daughter proudly. She asked:
“How much did Imma weigh?”
“Seven pounds.”
“Nunzia weighs almost nine pounds: my belly was small but she is large.”
She  really  had  named  her  for  her  mother.  And  in  order  not  to  upset
Fernando, her father, who was even more irascible in old age than he’d been as
a young man, and Enzo’s relatives, she had her baptized in the neighborhood
church and held a big party in the Basic Sight offices.
68.
The babies immediately became an excuse to spend more time together. Lila
and I talked on the phone, met to take them for a walk, spoke endlessly, no
longer about ourselves but about them. Or at least so it seemed to us. In reality
a new richness and complexity in our relationship began to manifest itself
through a mutual attention to our daughters. We compared them in every
detail as if to assure ourselves that the health or illness of the one was the
precise mirror of the health or illness of the other and as a result we could
readily intervene to reinforce the first and cut off the second. We told each
other  everything  that  seemed  good  and  useful  for  healthy  development,
engaging in a sort of virtuous competition of who could find the best food, the
softest  diaper,  the  most  effective  cream  for  a  rash.  There  was  no  pretty
garment acquired for Nunzia—but now she was called Tina, the diminutive of
Nunziatina—that Lila did not also get for Imma, and I, within the limits of my
finances, did the same. This onesie was cute on Tina, so I got one for Imma, too
—she’d say—or these shoes were cute on Tina and I got some for Imma, too.
“You know,” I said one day, smiling, “that you’ve given her the name of my
doll?”
“What doll?”
“Tina, you don’t remember?”
She touched her forehead as if she had a headache, and said:
“It’s true, but I didn’t do it on purpose.”
“She was a beautiful doll—I was attached to her.”
“My daughter is more beautiful.”
Meanwhile the weeks passed; already the scents of spring were flaring. One
morning my mother got worse, and there was a moment of panic. Since the
doctors at the clinic didn’t seem qualified even to my siblings, the idea of
taking her back to the hospital was mentioned. I asked Nino to find out if,
through the doctors who were connected to his in-laws and had taken care of
my mother before, it would be possible to avoid the wards and get a private
room. But Nino said that he was opposed to using connections or appeals, that
in  a  public  institution  treatment  should  be  the  same  for  everyone,  and  he
muttered ill-humoredly: in this country we have to stop thinking that even for
a  bed  in  the  hospital  you  have  to  be  a  member  of  a  lodge  or  rely  on  the
Camorra.  He  was  angry  with  Marcello,  naturally,  not  with  me,  but  I  felt
humiliated anyway. On the other hand I’m sure that in the end he would have
helped if my mother, although suffering atrociously, hadn’t made it clear in
every way possible that she preferred to die amid comforts rather than return,
even for a few hours, to a hospital ward. So one morning Marcello, surprising
us yet again, brought to the clinic one of the specialists who had treated our
mother.  The  specialist,  who  had  been  curt  when  he  was  working  in  the
hospital, was extremely cordial and returned often, greeted deferentially by
the doctors in the private clinic. Things improved.
But  soon  the  clinical  picture  worsened  again.  At  that  point  my  mother
gathered all her strength and did two contradictory but in her eyes equally
important things. Lila just then had found a way of getting jobs for Peppe and
Gianni with a client of hers in Baiano, but they had disregarded the offer, so
she—heaping blessings on my friend for her generosity—summoned her two
sons and became, at least for a moment, what she had been in the past. Her
eyes were furious, she threatened to pursue them from the kingdom of the
dead if they didn’t accept the offer: she made them weep, she reduced them to
lambs, she didn’t let go until she was sure she had subdued them. Then she
took  up  an  initiative  that  ran  in  the  opposite  direction.  She  summoned
Marcello, from whom she had just wrested Peppe and Gianni, and made him
swear solemnly that he would marry her younger daughter before she closed
her eyes forever. Marcello reassured her, he told her that he and Elisa had put
off getting married only because they were waiting for her to recover, and now
that  her  recovery  was  imminent  he  would  immediately  take  care  of  the
paperwork. Now my mother brightened. She made no distinction between the
power she attributed to Lila and that which she attributed to Marcello. She had
pressured both and was happy to have gained benefits for her children from
the most important people in the neighborhood; that is, in her view, in the
world.
For a few days she lingered in a state of peaceful joy. I brought Dede, whom
she loved dearly, and I let her hold Imma. She was even affectionate toward
Elsa, whom she had never liked much. I observed her: she was a gray, wrinkled
old woman, even though she wasn’t a hundred but sixty. I then first felt the
impact of time, the force that was pushing me toward forty, the velocity with
which life was consumed, the concreteness of the exposure to death: If it’s
happening to her, I thought, there’s no escape, it will happen to me as well.
One morning, when Imma was just over two months old, my mother said
weakly: Lenù, I’m truly content now, it’s only you I’m worried about, but you
are you and you’ve always been able to arrange things as you liked, so I have
confidence. Then she went to sleep and fell into a coma. She held out for a few
more days; she didn’t want to die. I remember that I was in her room with
Imma;  by  now  the  death  rattle  was  continuous,  it  had  become  one  of  the
ordinary sounds of the clinic. My father, who couldn’t bear to hear it anymore,
had  stayed  home  that  night,  weeping.  Elisa  had  taken  Silvio  out  to  the
courtyard to get some air, my brothers were smoking in a room nearby. I
stared for a long time at that insubstantial bulge under the sheet. My mother
was diminished almost to nothing, and yet she had been truly burdensome,
weighing on me, making me feel like a worm under a rock, protected and
crushed.  I  wished  that  wheeze  would  stop,  right  away,  now,  and,  to  my
surprise, it did. Suddenly the room was silent. I waited, I couldn’t find the
strength to get up and go to her. Then Imma clicked her tongue and the silence
was broken. I left the chair, went over to the bed. The two of us—I and the
infant, greedily seeking my nipple in her sleep, to feel that she was still part of
me—were,  in  that  place  of  illness,  the  only  living  and  healthy  part  of  my
mother that remained.
That day, I don’t know why, I had put on the bracelet she had given me more
than twenty years before. I hadn’t worn it for a long time; I usually wore the
finer jewelry that Adele had recommended. From then on I wore it often.
69.
I struggled to accept my mother’s death. Even though I didn’t shed a tear,
the pain lasted for a long time and perhaps has never really gone away. I had
considered her an insensitive and vulgar woman, I had feared her and fled.
Right after her funeral I felt the way you feel when it suddenly starts raining
hard, and you look around and find no place to take shelter. For weeks I saw
and  heard  her  everywhere,  night  and  day.  She  was  a  vapor  that  in  my
imagination continued to burn without a wick. I missed the different way of
being  together  we  had  discovered  during  her  illness,  I  prolonged  it  by
retrieving positive memories of when I was a child and she was young. My
sense of guilt wanted to compel her to endure. In a drawer I put a hairpin of
hers, a handkerchief, a pair of scissors, but they all seemed inadequate objects,
even the bracelet was worthless. My pregnancy had brought back the pain in
my hip and Imma’s birth hadn’t relieved it, but maybe that was why I decided
not to go to the doctor. I nurtured that pain like a bequest preserved in my
body.
The words she had said to me at the end (You’re you, I have confidence) also
stayed with me for a long time. She died convinced that because of how I was
made,  because  of  the  resources  I  had  accumulated,  I  would  not  be
overwhelmed by anything. That idea worked inside me and in the end helped
me.  I  decided  to  prove  to  her  that  she  had  been  right.  I  began  again  in  a
disciplined way to take care of myself. I returned to using every bit of empty
time for reading and writing. I lost what little interest I’d had in petty politics—
I couldn’t get excited at the intrigues of the five governing parties and their
quarrels  with  the  Communists,  as  Nino  now  was  actively  doing—but  I
continued  to  follow  closely  the  corrupt  and  violent  drift  of  the  country.  I
collected feminist readings and, still fortified by the small success of my last
book, proposed articles to the new journals directed at women. But, I have to
admit, a great part of my energy was focused on convincing my publisher that I
was moving along with the new novel.
A few years earlier half of a substantial advance had been paid, but in the
meantime I had done very little, I was stumbling along, still looking for a story.
The editor in chief, who was responsible for that generous sum, had never
pressured me, he inquired discreetly, and if I was elusive, because to admit the
truth seemed to me shameful, he let me be elusive. Then a small unpleasant
event occurred. A semi-sarcastic article appeared in the Corriere della Sera that,
after praising a first novel that had had a modest success, alluded to the failed
promise of the new Italian literature, and included my name. A few days later
the  editor  passed  through  Naples—he  was  to  take  part  in  a  prestigious
conference—and asked if we could meet.
His serious tone immediately worried me. In almost fifteen years he had
never insisted on his authority, he had sided with me against Adele, he had
always treated me kindly. With forced warmth I invited him to dinner on Via
Tasso, which cost me anxiety and hard work, but I did it partly because Nino
wanted to propose a new collection of essays.
The editor was polite but not affectionate. He expressed his condolences for
my mother, he praised Imma, he gave Dede and Elsa some colorful books, he
waited patiently for me to maneuver between dinner and daughters, leaving
Nino to talk to him about his possible book. When we got to dessert he brought
up the true reason for the meeting: he wanted to know if he could plan to bring
out my novel the following fall. I turned red.
“Fall of 1982?”
“Fall of 1982.”
“Maybe, but I’ll know better in a little while.”
“You have to know now.”
“I’m still nowhere near the end.”
“You could let me read something.”
“I don’t feel ready.”
Silence. He took a sip of wine, then said in a serious tone: “Up to now you’ve
been very lucky, Elena. The last book went particularly well, you’re respected,
you’ve gained a good number of readers. But readers have to be cultivated. If
you lose them, you lose the chance to publish other books.”
I was displeased. I understood that Adele, by force of repetition, had gotten
through even to that very civilized and polite man. I imagined the words of
Pietro’s  mother,  her  choice  of  terms—She’s  an  untrustworthy  southerner  who
behind  a  charming  appearance  weaves  crafty  tissues  of  lies—and  I  hated  myself
because I was proving to that man that those words were true. At dessert, the
editor, in a few curt phrases, liquidated Nino’s proposal, saying that it was a
difficult moment for essays. The awkwardness increased, no one knew what to
say, I talked about Imma until finally the guest looked at his watch and said
that he had to go. At that point I couldn’t take it and I said: “All right, I’ll
deliver the book in time for it to come out in the fall.”
70.
My promise soothed the editor. He stayed another hour, he chatted about
this and that, he made an effort to be more well disposed to Nino. He embraced
me as he left, whispering, I’m sure you’re writing a wonderful story.
As soon as I closed the door I exclaimed: Adele is still plotting against me,
I’m in trouble. But Nino didn’t agree. Even the slim possibility that his book
would be published had cheered him. Besides, he had been in Palermo recently
for the Socialist Party Congress, where he had seen both Guido and Adele, and
the professor had indicated that he admired some of his recent work. So he
said, conciliatory:
“Don’t exaggerate the intrigues of the Airotas. All you had to do was promise
you’d get to work and you saw how things changed?”
We quarreled. I had just promised a book, yes, but how, when would I be able
to write it with the necessary concentration and continuity? Did he realize
what my life had been, and still was? I listed randomly the illness and death of
my mother, the care of Dede and Elsa, the household tasks, the pregnancy, the
birth of Imma, his lack of interest in her, the rushing from this conference to
that  congress,  more  and  more  often  without  me,  and  the  disgust,  yes,  the
disgust at having to share him with Eleonora. I, I shouted at him, I am now
nearly divorced from Pietro, and you wouldn’t even separate. Could I work
among so many tensions, by myself, without any help from him?
The fight was pointless, Nino reacted as he always did. He looked depressed,
he whispered: You don’t understand, you can’t understand, you’re unfair, and
he swore fiercely that he loved me and couldn’t do without Imma, the children,
me. Finally he offered to pay for a housekeeper.
He had encouraged me on other occasions to find someone who could take
care of the house, the shopping, the cooking, the children, but, in order not to
seem excessively demanding, I had always responded that I didn’t want to be a
bigger  economic  burden  than  necessary.  Generally  I  tended  to  give  more
importance  not  to  what  would  be  helpful  to  me  but  to  what  he  would
appreciate. And then I didn’t want to admit that the same problems I had
already experienced with Pietro were surfacing in our relationship. But this
time, surprising him, I said immediately: Yes, all right, find this woman as soon
as possible. And it seemed to me that I was speaking in the voice of my mother,
not in the feeble voice of recent times but in strident tones. Who gave a damn
about the shopping, I had to take care of my future. And my future was to write
a novel in the next few months. And that novel had to be very good. And
nothing, not even Nino, would prevent me from doing my work well.
71.
I  examined  the  situation.  The  two  previous  books,  which  for  years  had
produced a little money, partly thanks to translations, had stopped selling. The
advance I had received for my new book and hadn’t yet earned was nearly
gone. The articles I wrote, working late into the night, either brought in little
or  were  not  paid  at  all.  I  lived,  in  other  words,  on  the  money  that  Pietro
contributed punctually every month and that Nino supplemented by taking on
the rent for the house, the bills, and, I have to admit, often giving me money
for clothes for myself and the children. But as long as I had had to confront all
the upheavals and inconveniences and sufferings that followed my return to
Naples, it had seemed fair. Now instead—after that evening—I decided that it
was urgent to become as autonomous as possible. I had to write and publish
regularly, I had to reinforce my profile as an author, I had to earn money. And
the reason was not any literary vocation, the reason had to do with the future:
Did I really think that Nino would take care of me and my daughters forever?
It  was  then  that  a  part  of  me—only  a  part—began  to  emerge  that
consciously, without particular suffering, admitted that it couldn’t really count
on him. It wasn’t just the old fear that he would leave me; rather it seemed to
me an abrupt contraction of perspective. I stopped looking into the distance, I
began to think that in the immediate future I couldn’t expect from Nino more
than what he was giving me, and that I had to decide if it was enough.
I  continued  to  love  him,  of  course.  I  liked  his  long  slender  body,  his
methodical intelligence. And I had a great admiration for his work. His old
ability  to  assemble  facts  and  interpret  them  was  a  skill  that  was  much  in
demand. Recently he had published a highly regarded work—maybe that was
the one Guido had liked so much—on the economic crisis and on the karstic
movement of capital that was being shifted from sources to be investigated
toward construction, finance, private television. Yet something about him had
begun to bother me. For example, I was wounded by his delight in finding favor
with my former father-in-law. Nor did I like the way he had begun again to
differentiate  Pietro—a  petty  professor  with  no  imagination,  highly  praised  only
because of his surname and his obtuse activity in the Communist Party—from his
father, the real Professor Airota, whom he praised unrestrainedly as the author
of fundamental volumes on Hellenism and as an outstanding and combative
figure of the socialist left. His renewed liking for Adele further wounded me; he
was constantly calling her a great lady, extraordinary at public relations. He
seemed to me, in other words, sensitive to the approval of those who had
authority and ready to catch out, or even, at times, humiliate, out of envy,
those who did not yet have enough of it and those who did not have it at all but
could have it. Something that marred the image that I had always had of him
and that he generally had of himself.
It wasn’t only that. The political and cultural climate was changing, other
readings were emerging. We had all stopped making extreme speeches, and I
was surprised to find myself agreeing with positions that years earlier I had
opposed in Pietro, out of a wish to contradict him, out of the need to quarrel.
But Nino went too far, he now found ridiculous not only every subversive
statement but also every ethical declaration, every display of purity. He said,
making fun of me: “There are too many sensitive souls around.”
“Meaning?”
“People who are outraged, as if they didn’t know that either the parties do
their job or you get armed gangs and Masonic lodges.”
“What do you mean?”
“I mean that a party can’t be anything other than a distributor of favors in
exchange for support, ideals are part of the furniture.”
“Well, then I’m a sensitive soul.”
“I know that.”
I began to find his craving to be politically surprising unpleasant. When he
organized dinners at my house he embarrassed his own guests by defending
from the left positions of the right. The fascists—he maintained—aren’t always
wrong  and  we  should  learn  to  talk  to  each  other.  Or:  You  can’t  simply
condemn, you have to get your hands dirty if you want to change things. Or
even: Justice should as soon as possible be subordinated to the rights of those
who have the task of governing, otherwise the judges become loose cannons,
dangerous for the preservation of the democratic system. Or again: Wages have
to be frozen, the mechanism of the wage index scale is ruinous for Italy. If
someone disagreed with him he became contemptuous, he sneered, he let it be
understood  that  it  wasn’t  worth  the  trouble  to  argue  with  people  wearing
blinders, whose heads were full of old slogans.
I retreated into an uneasy silence, in order not to take sides against him. He
loved the shifting sands of the present, the future for him was decided there.
He knew about everything that happened in the parties and in parliament,
about the internal movements of capital and of the organization of labor. I, on
the  other  hand,  persisted  in  reading  only  what  had  to  do  with  the  dark
conspiracies, the kidnappings and bloody last-ditch efforts of the armed red
gangs, the debate on the decline of the centrality of workers, the identification
of  new  opposition  subjects.  As  a  result  I  felt  more  comfortable  with  the
language of the other diners than with his. One evening he quarreled with a
friend  who  taught  in  the  school  of  architecture.  He  became  inflamed  by
passion, disheveled, handsome.
“You can’t distinguish between a step forward, a step back, and standing
still.”
“What’s a step forward?” the friend asked.
“A prime minister who isn’t the same old Christian Democrat.”
“And standing still?”
“A demonstration by steelworkers.”
“And a step back?”
“Asking who’s cleaner, the socialists or the Communists.”
“You’re turning cynical.”
“You, on the other hand, have always been a shit.”
No, Nino no longer persuaded me the way he used to. He expressed himself, I
don’t know how to say it, in a provocative and yet opaque way, as if precisely
he, who extolled the long view, were able to follow only the daily moves and
counter-moves of a system that to me, to his own friends, seemed rotten to the
core. Enough, he would insist, let’s end the childish aversion to power: one has
to be on the inside in the places where things are born and die: the parties, the
banks, television. And I listened, but when he turned to me I lowered my gaze. I
no longer concealed from myself that his conversation partly bored me, and
partly seemed to point to a brittleness that dragged him down.
One time he was lecturing Dede, who had to do some sort of crazy research
for her teacher, and to soften his pragmatism I said: “The people, Dede, always
have the possibility of turning everything upside down.”
Good-humoredly he replied, “Mamma likes to make up stories, which is a
great  job.  But  she  doesn’t  know  much  about  how  the  world  we  live  in
functions, and so whenever there’s something she doesn’t like she resorts to a
magic word: let’s turn everything upside down. You tell your teacher that we
have to make the world that exists function.”
“How?” I asked.
“With laws.”
“But if you say that the judges should be controlled.”
Displeased with me, he shook his head, just as Pietro used to do.
“Go and write your book,” he said, “otherwise you’ll complain it’s our fault
that you can’t work.”
He started a lesson with Dede on the division of powers, which I listened to
in silence and agreed with from A to Z.
72.
When Nino was home he staged a comic ritual with Dede and Elsa. They
dragged me into the little room where I had my desk, ordered me peremptorily
to get to work, and shut the door behind them, scolding me in chorus if I dared
to open it.
In general, if he had time, he was very available to the children: to Dede,
whom  he  judged  very  intelligent  but  too  rigid,  and  to  Elsa,  whose  feigned
acquiescence, behind which lurked malice and cunning, amused him. But what
I hoped would happen never did: he didn’t become attached to little Imma. He
played with her, of course, and sometimes he really seemed to enjoy himself.
For example, with Dede and Elsa he would bark at her, to get her to say the
word “dog.” I heard them howling through the house as I sought in vain to
make some notes, and if Imma by pure chance emitted from the depths of her
throat an indistinct sound that resembled d, Nino shrieked in unison with the
children: she said it, hooray, d. But nothing more. In fact he used the infant as a
doll to entertain Dede and Elsa. The increasingly rare times when he spent a
Sunday with us and the weather was fine, he went with them and Imma to the
Floridiana, encouraging them to push their sister’s stroller along the paths of
the park. When they returned they were all pleased. But a few words were
enough  for  me  to  guess  that  Nino  had  abandoned  Dede  and  Elsa  to  play
mamma to Imma, while he went off to converse with the real mothers of the
Vomero who were taking their children out for air and sun.
Over  time  I  had  become  used  to  his  penchant  for  seductive  behavior,  I
considered it a sort of tic. I was used above all to the way women immediately
liked him. But at a certain point something was spoiled there, too. I began to
notice that he had an impressive number of women friends, and that they all
seemed to brighten in his vicinity. I knew that light well, I wasn’t surprised.
Being  close  to  him  gave  you  the  impression  of  being  visible,  especially  to
yourself, and you were content. It was natural, therefore, that all those girls,
and older women, too, were fond of him, and if I didn’t exclude sexual desire I
also didn’t consider it essential. I stood confused on the edge of the remark
made long ago by Lila, In my opinion he’s not your friend, either, and tried as
infrequently as possible to transmute it into the question: Are these women his
lovers? So it wasn’t the hypothesis that he was betraying me that disturbed me
but something else. I was convinced that Nino encouraged in those people a
sort of maternal impulse to do, within the limits of the possible, what could be
useful to him.
Shortly  after  Imma’s  birth,  things  began  to  go  better  for  him.  When  he
appeared he told me proudly of his successes, and I was quickly forced to
register that, just as in the past his career had had a boost thanks to his wife’s
family, so, too, behind every new responsibility he got was the mediation of a
woman. One had obtained for him a biweekly column in Il Mattino. One had
recommended  him  for  the  keynote  speech  at  an  important  conference  in
Ferrara.  One  had  put  him  on  the  managing  editorial  board  of  a  Turinese
journal. Another—originally from Philadelphia and married to a NATO officer
stationed  in  Naples—had  recently  added  his  name  as  a  consultant  for  an
American foundation. The list of favors was continuously lengthening. Besides,
hadn’t  I  myself  helped  him  publish  a  book  with  an  important  publishing
house? And, if I thought about it, hadn’t Professor Galiani been the source of
his reputation as a high-school student?
I began to study him while he was engaged in that work of seduction. He
often invited young and not so young women to dinner at my house, alone or
with  their  husbands  or  companions.  I  observed  with  some  anxiety  that  he
knew how to give them space: he ignored the male guests almost completely,
making the women the center of his attention, and at times focusing on one in
particular. Many evenings I witnessed conversations that, although they took
place in the presence of other people, he was able to conduct as if he were
alone,  in  private,  with  the  only  woman  who  at  that  moment  appeared  to
interest  him.  He  said  nothing  allusive,  or  compromising,  he  merely  asked
questions.
“And then what happened?”
“I left home. I left Lecce at eighteen and Naples wasn’t an easy city.”
“Where did you live?”
“In  a  run-down  apartment  in  the  Tribunali,  with  two  other  girls.  There
wasn’t even a quiet corner where I could study.”
“And men?”
“Certainly not.”
“There must have been someone.”
“There was one, and, just my luck, he’s here, I’m married to him.”
Although the woman had brought up her husband as if to include him in the
conversation, Nino ignored him and continued to talk to her in his warm voice.
He had a curiosity about the world of women that was genuine. But—this I
knew very well by now—he didn’t in the least resemble the men who in those
years made a show of giving up at least a few of their privileges. I thought not
only of professors, architects, artists who came to our house and displayed a
sort  of  feminization  of  behaviors,  feelings,  opinions;  but  also  of  Carmen’s
husband, Roberto, who was really helpful, and Enzo, who with no hesitation
would have sacrificed all his time to Lila’s needs. Nino was sincerely interested
in how women found themselves. There was no dinner at which he did not
repeat that to think along with them was now the only way to a true thought.
But he held tight to his spaces and his numerous activities, he put first of all,
always and only, himself, he didn’t give up an instant of his time.
On one occasion I tried, with affectionate irony, to show him up as a liar in
front of everyone: “Don’t believe him. At first he helped me clear, he washed
the dishes: today he doesn’t even pick his socks up off the floor.”
“That’s not true,” he protested.
“Yes, it is. He wants to liberate the women of others but not his.”
“Well, your liberation shouldn’t necessarily signify the loss of my freedom.”
In  remarks  like  this,  too,  uttered  playfully,  I  soon  recognized,  uneasily,
echoes  of  my  conflicts  with  Pietro.  Why  had  I  gotten  so  angry  at  my  ex-
husband while with Nino I let it go? I thought: maybe every relationship with
men can only reproduce the same contradictions and, in certain environments,
even the same smug responses. But then I said to myself: I mustn’t exaggerate,
there’s a difference, with Nino it’s certainly going better.
But was it really? I was less and less sure. I remembered how, when he was
our guest in Florence, he had supported me against Pietro, I thought again with
pleasure of how he had encouraged me to write. But now? Now that it was
crucial for me to seriously get to work, he seemed unable to instill in me the
same confidence as before. Things had changed over the years. Nino always
had his own urgent needs, and even if he wanted to he couldn’t devote himself
to me. To mollify me he had hurried to get, through his mother, a certain
Silvana, a massive woman of around fifty, with three children, always cheerful,
very lively, and good with the three girls. Generously he had glossed over what
he paid her, and after a week had asked: Everything in order, it’s working? But
it was evident that he felt that the expense authorized him not to be concerned
with me. Of course he was attentive, he regularly asked: Are you writing? But
that was it. The central place that my effort to write had had at the start of our
relationship had vanished. And it wasn’t only that. I myself, with a certain
embarrassment, no longer recognized him as the authority he had once been. I
discovered, in other words, that the part of me that confessed I could not really
depend on Nino also no longer saw around his every word the flaming halo I
had seemed to perceive since childhood. I gave him a still shapeless paragraph
to read and he exclaimed: Perfect. I summarized a plot and characters that I
was sketching out and he said: Great, very intelligent. But he didn’t convince
me, I didn’t believe him, he expressed enthusiastic opinions about the work of
too many women. His recurring phrase after an evening with other couples
was almost always: What a boring man, she is certainly better than he is. His
women  friends,  inasmuch  as  they  were  his  friends,  were  always  judged
extraordinary. And his judgment of women in general was, as a rule, tolerant.
Nino could justify even the sadistic obtuseness of the employees of the post
office, the ignorant narrow-mindedness of Dede and Elsa’s teachers. In other
words I no longer felt unique, I was a form that was valid for all women. But if
for him I wasn’t unique, what help could his opinion give me, how could I draw
energy from it to do well?
Exasperated, one evening, by the praise he had heaped on a biologist friend
in my presence, I asked him: “Is it possible that a stupid woman doesn’t exist?”
“I didn’t say that: I said that as a rule you are better than us.”
“I’m better than you?”
“Absolutely, yes, and I’ve known it for a very long time.”
“All right, I believe you, but at least once in your life, have you met a bitch?”
“Yes.”
“Tell me her name.”
I knew what he would say, and yet I insisted, hoping he would say Eleonora. I
waited, he became serious: “I can’t.”
“Tell me.”
“If I tell you you’ll get mad.”
“I won’t get mad.”
“Lina.”
73.
If in the past I had believed somewhat in his recurring hostility toward Lila,
now  I  found  it  less  and  less  convincing,  partly  because  it  was  joined  not
infrequently  to  moments  when,  as  had  happened  a  few  nights  earlier,  he
demonstrated a completely different feeling. He was trying to finish an essay
on work and the automation of Fiat, but I saw that he was in trouble (What
precisely is a microprocessor, what’s a chip, how does this stuff function in practice). I
had said to him: talk to Enzo Scanno, he’s smart. He had asked absentmindedly:
Who is Enzo Scanno? Lina’s companion, I answered. He said with a half smile:
Then I prefer to talk to Lina, she certainly knows more. And, as if the memory
had returned, he added, with a trace of resentment: Wasn’t Scanno the idiot
son of the fruit seller?
That tone struck me. Enzo was the founder of a small, innovative business—a
miracle, considering that the office was in the heart of the old neighborhood.
Precisely because he was a scholar, Nino should have displayed interest and
admiration toward him. Instead, he had returned him, thanks to that imperfect
—was—to the time of elementary school, when he helped his mother in the
shop or went around with his father and the cart and didn’t have time to study
and didn’t shine. He had, with irritation, taken every virtue away from Enzo,
and given them all to Lila. That was how I realized that if I had forced him to
delve into himself, it would have emerged that the highest example of female
intelligence—maybe  his  own  worship  of  female  intelligence,  even  certain
lectures claiming that the waste of women’s intellectual resources was the
greatest waste of all—had to do with Lila, and that if our season of love was
already darkening, the season of Ischia would always remain radiant for him.
The man for whom I left Pietro, I thought, is what he is because his encounter
with Lila reshaped him that way.
74.
This idea occurred to me one frigid fall morning when I was taking Dede and
Elsa to school. I was driving distractedly, and the idea took root. I distinguished
the love for the neighborhood boy, the high-school student—a feeling of mine
that  had  as  its  object  a  fantasy  of  mine,  conceived  before  Ischia—from  the
passion  that  had  overwhelmed  me  for  the  young  man  in  the  bookstore  in
Milan, the person who had appeared in my house in Florence. I had always
maintained  a  connection  between  those  two  emotional  blocks,  and  that
morning  instead  it  seemed  to  me  that  there  was  no  connection,  that  the
continuity was a trick of logic. In the middle, I thought, there had been a
rupture—his love for Lila—that should have cancelled Nino forever from my
life, but which I had refused to reckon with. To whom, then, was I bound, and
whom did I still love today?
Usually Silvana drove the children to school, and, while Nino was still asleep,
I took care of Imma. That day, however, I had arranged things so that I could
stay out all morning; I wanted to see if I could find in the Biblioteca Nazionale
an old volume by Roberto Bracco, entitled In the World of Women. Meanwhile, I
advanced slowly through the morning traffic with that thought in mind. I was
driving, I was answering the children’s questions, I was returning to a Nino
made  of  two  parts,  one  that  belonged  to  me,  the  other  alien.  When,  with
countless warnings and bits of advice, I left Dede and Elsa at their respective
schools, the thought had become an image and, as happened often in that
period, had been transformed into the nucleus of a possible story. It could be, I
said  to  myself  as  I  descended  toward  the  sea,  a  novel  in  which  a  woman
marries the man she’s been in love with since childhood, but on their wedding
night she realizes that while a part of his body belongs to her, the other part is
physically inhabited by a childhood friend of hers. Then in a flash everything
was swept away by a sort of domestic alarm bell: I had forgotten to buy diapers
for Imma.
Daily life frequently erupted, like a slap, making irrelevant if not ridiculous
every meandering little fantasy. I pulled up, angry at myself. I was so burdened
that, although I scrupulously wrote down on a notepad the things I needed to
buy, I ended up forgetting the list itself. I fumed, I could never organize myself
as  I  should.  Nino  had  an  important  appointment  for  work,  maybe  he  had
already left, and anyway it was useless to count on him. I couldn’t send Silvana
to the pharmacy because she would have had to leave the baby alone in the
house. As a result there were no diapers, Imma couldn’t be changed and would
have a rash for days. I went back to Via Tasso. I hurried to the pharmacy, I
bought the diapers, I arrived home out of breath. I was sure I would hear Imma
screaming from the landing but I opened the door with the key and entered a
silent apartment.
I glimpsed the baby in the living room, sitting in her playpen, without a
diaper, playing with a doll. I slipped past so that she wouldn’t see me, or she
would start howling to be picked up, and I wanted to hand over the package to
Silvana and try again to get to the library. A faint noise came from the big
bathroom (we had a small bathroom that Nino generally used, and a large one
for the girls and me), I thought that Silvana must be straightening it. I went
there, the door was half open, I pushed it. First I saw, in the luminous space of
the long mirror, Silvana’s head bent forward, and I was struck by the stripe of
the center part, the two black bands of her hair threaded with white. Then I
became aware of Nino’s closed eyes, his open mouth. Suddenly, in a flash, the
reflected image and the real bodies came together. Nino was in his undershirt
and otherwise naked, his long thin legs parted, his feet bare. Silvana, curved
forward, with both hands resting on the sink, had her big underpants at her
knees and the dark smock pulled up around her waist. He, while he stroked her
sex holding her heavy stomach with his arm, was gripping an enormous breast
that stuck out of the smock and the bra, and meanwhile was thrusting his flat
stomach against her large white buttocks.
I  pulled  the  door  hard  toward  myself  just  as  Nino  opened  his  eyes  and
Silvana suddenly raised her head, throwing me a frightened gaze. I rushed to
get Imma from the playpen and while Nino shouted, Elena, wait, I was already
out of the house, I didn’t even call the elevator, I ran down the stairs with the
baby in my arms.
75.
I took refuge in the car, I started the engine, and with Imma on my knees I
left. The baby seemed happy, she wanted to honk the horn, as Elsa had taught
her, she spoke her incomprehensible little words alternating with shrieks of
joy at my presence. I drove without a goal, I wanted only to get as far away
from  the  house  as  possible.  Finally  I  found  myself  at  Sant’Elmo.  I  parked,
turned off the engine, and discovered that I had no tears, I wasn’t suffering, I
was only frozen with horror.
I couldn’t believe it. Was it possible that that Nino whom I had discovered as
he was thrusting his taut sex inside the sex of a mature woman—a woman who
cleaned  my  house,  did  my  shopping,  cooked,  took  care  of  my  children;  a
woman  marked  by  the  struggle  to  survive,  large,  worn-out,  the  absolute
opposite of the cultivated, elegant women he brought to dinner—was the boy
of my adolescence? For the whole time I was driving blindly, perhaps scarcely
feeling the weight of the half-naked Imma, who was pounding the horn in vain
and happily calling me, I couldn’t give him a stable identity. I felt as if, entering
the house, I had suddenly found out in the open, in my bathroom, an alien
creature who usually stayed hidden inside the skin of the father of my third
daughter. The stranger had the features of Nino, but wasn’t him. Was it the
other,  the  one  born  after  Ischia?  But  which  one?  The  one  who  had
impregnated  Silvia?  The  lover  of  Mariarosa?  The  husband  of  Eleonora,
unfaithful and yet closely bound to her? The married man who had said to me,
a married woman, that he loved me, wanted me at all costs?
Along the entire route that led me to the Vomero, I had tried to cling to the
Nino of the neighborhood and of high school, the Nino of tenderness and love,
to get myself out of the revulsion. Only when I stopped at Sant’Elmo did the
bathroom return to mind, and the moment when he had opened his eyes and
seen me in the mirror, standing on the threshold. Then everything seemed
clearer. There was no split between that man who came after Lila and the boy
with whom—before Lila—I had been in love since childhood. Nino was only
one, and the expression he had on his face while he was inside Silvana was the
proof. It was the expression of his father, Donato, not when he deflowered me
on the Maronti but when he touched me between the legs, under the sheet, in
Nella’s kitchen.
Nothing alien, then, but much that was ugly. Nino was what he wouldn’t
have wanted to be and yet always had been. When he rhythmically hammered
against Silvana’s buttocks and was also kindly taking care to give her pleasure,
he wasn’t lying, just as he wasn’t lying when he wronged me and was sorry,
apologized, begged me to forgive him, swore that he loved me. He is like that, I
said to myself. But that didn’t console me. I felt, rather, that the horror, instead
of fading, found a more solid refuge in that statement. Then a warm liquid
spread down to my knees. I shook myself: Imma was naked, she had peed on
me.
76.
Going home seemed unthinkable, even though it was cold and Imma risked
getting sick. I wrapped her in my coat as if we were playing, I bought a new
package of diapers, I put one on after cleaning her with a baby wipe. Now I had
to decide what to do. Dede and Elsa would get out of school soon, irritable and
hungry; Imma was already hungry. I, my jeans wet, without a coat, nerves
tense, was shivering with cold. I looked for a telephone, I called Lila, I asked:
“Can I come to lunch at your house with the children?”
“Of course.”
“Enzo won’t be annoyed?”
“You know he’ll be pleased.”
I heard Tina’s happy little voice, Lila said to her: Quiet. Then she asked me
with a wariness that she normally didn’t have: “Is something wrong?”
“Yes.”
“What happened?”
“What you predicted.”
“Did you fight with Nino?”
“I’ll tell you later, I have to go now.”
I arrived early at school. Imma had by now lost any interest in me, the
steering  wheel,  the  horn,  and  was  howling.  I  forced  her  yet  again  to  stay
wrapped in the jacket and we went to find some cookies. I thought I was acting
calmly—inside I felt tranquil: not fury but disgust still prevailed, a revulsion
not different from what I would have felt if I had seen two lizards coupling—
but I realized that the passersby were looking at me with curiosity, with alarm,
as I hurried along the street in my wet pants, talking aloud to the baby, who,
squeezed tight in the coat, was wriggling and wailing.
At the first cookie Imma quieted down, but her calm freed my anxiety. Nino
must have put off his appointment, he was probably looking for me, I was in
danger of finding him at school. Since Elsa came out before Dede, who was in
her second year of middle school, I went and stood in a corner from which I
could watch the entrance of the elementary school without being seen. My
teeth  were  chattering  with  cold,  Imma  was  smearing  my  coat  with  saliva-
soaked cookie crumbs. I surveyed the area, nervously, but Nino didn’t appear.
And he didn’t appear at the entrance of the middle school, from which Dede
soon emerged in a flood of pushing and shoving, shouts, and insults in dialect.
The children paid little attention to me; they were very interested in the
novelty of my coming to get them with Imma.
“Why are you holding her in the coat?” Dede asked.
“Because she’s cold.”
“Did you see she’s ruining it?”
“It doesn’t matter.”
“Once when I got you dirty you slapped me,” Elsa complained.
“It’s not true.”
“It’s very true.”
Dede investigated:
“Why is it that she has only a shirt and diaper on?”
“She’s fine like that.”
“Did something happen?”
“No. Now we’re going to have lunch at Aunt Lina’s.”
They greeted the news with their usual enthusiasm, then they settled in the
car, and while the baby talked to her sisters in her obscure language, happy to
be the center of their attention, they began to fight over who got to hold her. I
insisted that they hold her together, without pulling her this way and that:
She’s not made of rubber, I cried. Elsa wasn’t pleased with that solution and
swore at Dede in dialect. I tried to slap her, I said, staring at her in the rearview
mirror: What did you say, repeat it, what did you say? She didn’t cry, she
abandoned Imma to Dede, muttering that taking care of her sister bored her.
Then, when the baby reached out her hands to play, she pushed her away
roughly.  She  shouted,  assaulting  my  nerves:  Imma,  that’s  enough,  you’re
bothering me, you’re getting me dirty. And to me: Mamma, make her stop. I
couldn’t bear it anymore, I let out a scream that frightened all three of them.
We crossed the city in a state of tension broken only by the whispering of Dede
and Elsa, who were trying to understand if, again, something irreparable was
about to happen in their lives.
I couldn’t even tolerate that consultation. I couldn’t bear anything anymore:
their childhood, my role as mother, Imma’s babbling. And then the presence of
my daughters in the car clashed with the images of coitus that were constantly
before me, with the odor of sex that was still in my nostrils, with the rage that
was beginning to advance, along with the most vulgar dialect. Nino had fucked
the servant and then gone to his appointment, not giving a shit about me or
even about his daughter. Ah, what a piece of shit, all I did was make mistakes.
Was he like his father? No, too simple. Nino was very intelligent, Nino was
extraordinarily cultured. His propensity for fucking did not come from a crude,
naïve display of virility based on half-fascistic, half-southern clichés. What he
had  done  to  me,  what  he  was  doing  to  me,  was  filtered  by  a  very  refined
knowledge. He dealt in complex concepts, he knew that this way he would
offend me to the point of destroying me. But he had done it just the same. He
had thought: I can’t give up my pleasure just because that shit can be a pain in
the  ass.  Like  that,  just  like  that.  And  surely  he  judged  as  philistine—that
adjective  was  still  very  widespread  in  our  world—my  possible  reaction.
Philistine, philistine. I even knew the line he would resort to in sophisticated
justification: What’s the harm, the flesh is weak and I’ve read all the books.
Exactly those words, nasty son of a bitch. Rage had opened up a pathway in the
horror. I shouted at Imma—even at Imma—to be quiet. When I reached Lila’s
house I hated Nino as until that moment I had never hated anyone.
77.
Lila had made lunch. She knew that Dede and Elsa adored orecchiette with
tomato sauce and she announced this, creating a rowdy scene of enthusiasm.
That wasn’t all. She took Imma from my arms and cared for her and Tina as if
suddenly her daughter had doubled. She changed them both, washed them,
dressed  them  identically,  cuddled  them  with  an  extraordinary  display  of
maternal care. Then, since the two little girls had recognized each other at
once and were playing, she put them down on an old carpet, to crawl around,
babble. How different they were. Bitterly I compared the daughter of Nino and
me  to  the  daughter  of  Lila  and  Enzo.  Tina  seemed  prettier,  healthier  than
Imma: she was the sweet fruit of a solid relationship.
Meanwhile Enzo came home from work, cordially laconic as usual. At the
table neither he nor Lila asked me why I wasn’t eating. Only Dede intervened,
as if to take me away from her own bad thoughts and those of the others. She
said: my Mamma always eats just a little because she doesn’t want to get fat,
and I’m doing that, too. I exclaimed, threatening: You have to clean your plate
down to the last bite. And Enzo, perhaps to protect my daughters from me,
started a comical contest to see who could eat the most and finish first. He
patiently  answered  Dede’s  many  questions  about  Rino—my  daughter  had
hoped to see him at least for lunch—and explained that he had started a job in
a workshop and was out all day. Then, at the end of the meal, in great secrecy,
he took the two sisters into Gennaro’s room to show them all the treasures
there. After a few minutes there was a burst of furious music, and they didn’t
come back.
I was alone with Lila, and I told her every detail, in a tone between sarcasm
and suffering. She listened without interrupting. I realized, the more I put into
words what had happened, the more ridiculous the scene of sex between that
fat woman and skinny Nino seemed. He woke up—at a certain point the words
emerged in dialect—he found Silvana in the bathroom, and even before peeing
he pulled up her skirt and stuck it in. Then I burst out laughing in a vulgar
fashion and Lila looked at me uneasily. She used such tones, she didn’t expect
them from me. You have to calm down, she said, and since Imma was crying we
went into the other room.
My  daughter,  fair-haired,  red  in  the  face,  was  shedding  large  tears,  her
mouth open, and as soon as she saw me she raised her arms to be picked up.
Tina, dark, pale, stared at her, disconcerted, and when her mother appeared
she didn’t move, she called to her as if she wanted her to help her understand,
saying “Mamma” clearly. Lila picked up both babies, settled one on each arm,
kissed mine, drying her tears with her lips, spoke to her, soothed her.
I was amazed. I thought: Tina says “Mamma” clearly, all the syllables, Imma
doesn’t do that yet and is almost a month older. I felt at a loss and sad. 1981
was about to end. I would get rid of Silvana. I didn’t know what to write, the
months would fly by, I wouldn’t deliver my book, I would lose ground as well as
my reputation as a writer. I would remain without a future, dependent on
financial support from Pietro, alone with three daughters, without Nino. Nino
lost, Nino over. The part of me that continued to love him appeared again, not
as in Florence but, rather, as the child in elementary school had loved him,
seeing him coming out of school. In confusion I searched for an excuse to
forgive him in spite of the humiliation, I couldn’t bear to drive him out of my
life. Where was he? Was it possible that he hadn’t even tried to look for me? I
put together Enzo, who had immediately taken care of the two children, and
Lila, who had freed me of every task and had listened, leaving me all the space I
wanted. I finally understood that they had known everything before I arrived
in the neighborhood. I asked: “Did Nino call?”
“Yes.”
“What did he say?”
“That it was foolish, that I should stay with you, that I should help you
understand, that today people live like this. Talk.”
“And you?”
“I slammed the telephone down on him.”
“But he’ll call again?”
“Of course he’ll call again.”
I felt discouraged.
“Lila, I don’t know how to live without him. It all lasted such a short time. I
broke up my marriage, I came to live here with the children, I had another
child. Why?”
“Because you made a mistake.”
I didn’t like the remark, it sounded like the echo of an old offense. She was
reminding me that I had made a mistake even though she had tried to get me
out of the mistake. She was saying that I had wanted to make a mistake, and as
a result she had been mistaken, I wasn’t intelligent, I was a stupid woman. I
said: “I have to talk to him, I have to confront him.”
“All right, but leave me the children.”
“You can’t do it, there are four.”
“There are five, there’s also Gennaro. And he’s the most difficult of all.”
“You see? I’ll take them.”
“Don’t even mention it.”
I admitted that I needed her help, I said: “I’ll leave them until tomorrow, I
need time to resolve the situation.”
“Resolve it how?”
“I don’t know.”
“You want to continue with Nino?”
I could hear her opposition and I almost shouted: “What can I do?”
“The only thing possible: leave him.”
For her it was the right solution, she had always wanted it to end like that,
she had never concealed it from me. I said: “I’ll think about it.”
“No, you won’t think about it. You’ve already decided to pretend it was
nothing and go on.”
I avoided answering but she pressed me, she said that I shouldn’t throw
myself away, that I had another destiny, that if I went on like that I would lose
myself. I noticed that she was becoming harsh, I felt that to restrain me she
was on the point of telling me what for a long time I had wanted to know and
what for a long time she had been silent about. I was afraid, but had I not
myself, on various occasions, tried to urge her to be clear? And now, had I not
come to her also so that finally she would tell me everything?
“If you have something to tell me,” I said, “speak.”
And she made up her mind, she looked at me, I looked down. She said that
Nino had often sought her out. She said that he had asked her to come back to
him, both before he had become involved with me and after. She said that
when they took my mother to the hospital he had been particularly insistent.
She said that while the doctors were examining my mother and they were
waiting for the results in the waiting room he had sworn to her that he was
with me only to feel closer to her.
“Look at me,” she whispered. “I know I’m mean to tell you these things, but
he  is  much  worse  than  I  am.  He  has  the  worst  kind  of  meanness,  that  of
superficiality.”
78.
I returned to Via Tasso determined to cut off every relation with Nino. I
found the house empty and in perfect order, I sat beside the French door that
led to the balcony. Life in that apartment was over, in a couple of years the
reasons for my very presence in Naples had been consumed.
I waited with growing anxiety for him to appear. Several hours passed, I fell
asleep, I woke with a start, when it was dark. The telephone was ringing.
I hurried to answer, sure that it was Nino, but it was Antonio. He was calling
from a café nearby, he asked if I could meet him. I said: Come up. I heard his
hesitation,  then  he  agreed.  I  had  no  doubt  that  Lila  had  sent  him,  and  he
admitted it himself right away.
“She doesn’t want you to do something foolish,” he said, making an effort to
speak in Italian.
“You can stop me?”
“Yes.”
“How?”
He sat down in the living room, after refusing the coffee I wanted to make
for him, and deliberately, in the tone of someone who is used to giving detailed
reports, listed all Nino’s lovers: names, surnames, professions, relatives. Some I
didn’t know, they were relationships from long ago. Others he had brought to
dinner at my house and I remembered them, affectionate with me and the
children. Mirella, who had taken care of Dede, Elsa, and also Imma, had been
with him for three years. And his relationship with the gynecologist who had
delivered my daughter, and Lila’s too, was even longer. Antonio enumerated a
sizable number of females—he used that word—with whom, at various times,
Nino  had  applied  the  same  scheme:  an  intense  period  of  meetings,  then
occasional encounters, in no case a definitive break. He’s faithful, Antonio said,
sarcastically, he never really cuts off relations: now he goes to that one, now he
goes to that other.
“Does Lina know?”
“Yes.”
“Since when?”
“Recently.”
“Why didn’t you tell me right away?”
“I wanted to tell you right away.”
“And Lina?”
“She said to wait.”
“And you obeyed her. You two let me cook and set the table for people he
had betrayed me with the day before or would betray me with the day after. I
ate with people whose foot or knee or something else he touched under the
table. I entrusted my children to a girl he jumped on as soon as I looked away.”
Antonio  shrugged,  he  looked  at  his  hands,  clasped  them,  and  left  them
between his knees.
“If they tell me to do a thing I do it,” he said in dialect.
But then he got confused. I almost always do it, he said, and tried to explain:
sometimes  I  obey  money,  sometimes  respect,  in  some  cases  myself.  As  for
infidelities, he said, if you don’t find out about them at the right moment
they’re of no use: when you’re in love you forgive everything. For infidelities to
have their real impact some lovelessness has to develop first. And he went on
like that, piling up painful remarks about the blindness of people in love. As if
by way of example, he told me again about how, years before, he had spied on
Nino and Lila for the Solaras. In that case, he said proudly, I didn’t do what
they ordered. He hadn’t felt like handing Lila over to Michele and had called
Enzo so that he could get her out of trouble. He spoke again of the beating he
had given Nino. I did it, he muttered, most of all because you loved him and not
me, and then because if that piece of shit went back to Lina, she would have
stayed faithful to him and would be ruined forever. You see, he concluded, in
that case, too, there was little to be gained by talking, Lina wouldn’t have
listened to me, love not only doesn’t have eyes, it doesn’t have ears, either.
I asked him, stunned:
“In all these years you never told Lina that Nino was going back to her that
night?”
“No.”
“You should have.”
“Why? When my head says, it’s better to act in this way, I do it, and I don’t
think about it anymore. If you go back to it you only make trouble.”
How wise he had become. That was when I learned that the story of Nino
and Lila would have lasted a little longer if Antonio hadn’t cut it off with a
beating.  But  I  immediately  discarded  the  hypothesis  that  they  would  have
loved  each  other  all  their  lives,  and  perhaps  both  he  and  she  would  have
become  utterly  different  people:  to  me  it  seemed  not  only  unlikely  but
unbearable. Instead I sighed with impatience. Antonio had decided for his own
reasons to save Lila and now Lila had sent him to save me. I looked at him, I
said with explicit sarcasm something about his role as a protector of women.
He should have showed up in Florence, I thought, when I was hanging in the
balance, when I didn’t know what to do, and made the decision for me with his
gnarled hands, as years before he had decided for Lila. I asked him teasingly:
“What orders do you have now?”
“Before sending me here, Lina forbade me to break the face of that shit. But I
did it once and I’d like to do it again.”
“You’re unreliable.”
“Yes and no.”
“Meaning?”
“It’s a complicated situation, Lenù, stay out of it. You just tell me that the
son of Sarratore should repent the day he was born and I’ll make him repent.”
I couldn’t contain myself, I burst out laughing at the mannered seriousness
with  which  he  expressed  himself.  It  was  the  tone  he  had  learned  in  the
neighborhood as a boy, the formal tone of the upright male: he who in reality
had been timid and fearful. What an effort it must have been, but now it was
his tone, he wouldn’t have known how to have any other. The only difference,
in relation to the past, was that in that situation he was making an effort to
speak in Italian and the difficult language was coming to him with a foreign
accent.
He darkened because of my laughter, he looked at the black panes of the
window, he said: Don’t laugh. I saw that his forehead was shiny in spite of the
cold, he was sweating from the shame of having seemed ridiculous to me. He
said: I know I don’t express myself well, I know German better than Italian. I
became aware of his odor, the way it had smelled at the time of the ponds. I’m
laughing, I apologized, at the situation, at you, who’ve wanted to kill Nino
forever, and at me, who if he showed up now would say to you: Yes, kill him.
I’m laughing out of despair, because I’ve never been so offended, because I feel
humiliated in  a  way that  I  don’t  know if  you  can imagine,  because  at  this
moment I’m so ill that I think I’m fainting.
In fact I felt weak, and dead inside. So I was suddenly grateful to Lila for
having had the sensitivity to send me Antonio, he was the only person whose
affection at that moment I didn’t doubt. Besides, his lean body, his big bones,
his  thick  eyebrows,  his  coarse  features  had  remained  familiar  to  me,  they
didn’t repel me, I wasn’t afraid of them. At the ponds, I said, it was cold and we
didn’t feel it: I’m trembling, can I sit next to you?
He looked at me uncertainly, but I didn’t wait for his assent. I got up, I sat on
his knees. He didn’t move, he extended only his arms, for fear of touching me,
and let them fall to the sides of the chair. I leaned against him, resting my face
between his neck and his shoulder, it seemed to me that for a few seconds I fell
asleep.
“Lenù.”
“Yes?”
“Do you not feel well?”
“Hold me, I have to warm up.”
“No.”
“Why?”
“I’m not sure you want me.”
“I want you now, this time only: it’s something you owe me and I you.”
“I don’t owe you anything. I love you and you, instead, have always loved
only him.”
“Yes, but I never desired anyone the way I desired you, not even him.”
I talked for a long time, I told him the truth, the truth of that moment and
the truth of the faraway time of the ponds. He was the discovery of excitement,
he was the pit of the stomach that grew warm, that opened up, that turned
liquid, releasing a burning indolence. Franco, Pietro, Nino had stumbled on
that  expectation  but  had  never  managed  to  satisfy  it,  because  it  was  an
expectation without a definite object, it was the hope of pleasure, the hardest
to fulfill. The taste of Antonio’s mouth, the perfume of his desire, his hands, the
large sex taut between his thighs constituted a before that couldn’t be matched.
The after had never been truly equal to our afternoons hidden by the skeleton
of the canning factory, although they consisted of love without penetration
and often without orgasm.
I spoke in an Italian that was complex. I did it more to explain to myself
what I was doing than to clarify to him, and this must have seemed to him an
act of trust, he seemed content. He held me, he kissed me on one shoulder,
then on the neck, finally on the mouth. I don’t think I’ve had any other sexual
relation like that, which abruptly joined the ponds of more than twenty years
earlier  and  the  room  on  Via  Tasso,  the  chair,  the  floor,  the  bed,  suddenly
sweeping away everything that was between us, that divided us, what was me,
what was him. Antonio was delicate, he was brutal, and I was the same, no less
than him. He demanded things and I demanded things with a fury, an anxiety,
a  need  for  violation  that  I  didn’t  think  I  harbored.  At  the  end  he  was
annihilated by wonder and I was, too.
“What  happened?”  I  asked,  stunned,  as  if  the  memory  of  that  absolute
intimacy had already vanished.
“I don’t know,” he said, “but luckily it happened.”
I smiled.
“You’re like everybody else, you’ve betrayed your wife.”
I wanted to joke, but he took me seriously, he said in dialect: “I haven’t
betrayed anyone. My wife—before now—doesn’t exist yet.”
An obscure formulation but I understood. He was trying to tell me that he
agreed with me, seeking to communicate, in turn, a sense of time outside the
present chronology. He wanted to say that we had lived now a small fragment
of a day that belonged to twenty years earlier. I kissed him, I whispered: Thank
you, and I told him I was grateful because he had chosen to ignore the brutal
reasons for all that sex—mine and his—and to see in it only the need to close
our accounts.
Then the telephone rang, I went to answer, it might be Lila who needed me
for the children. But it was Nino.
“Luckily you’re home,” he said breathlessly. “I’m coming right away.”
“No.”
“When?”
“Tomorrow.”
“Let me explain, it’s essential, it’s urgent.”
“No.”
“Why?”
I told him and hung up.
79.
It was hard to separate from Nino; it took months. I don’t think I’ve ever
suffered so much for a man; it tortured me both to keep him away and to take
him back. He wouldn’t admit that he had made romantic and sexual offers to
Lila. He insulted her, he mocked her, he accused her of wanting to destroy our
relationship. But he was lying. At first he always lied, he even tried to convince
me that what I had seen in the bathroom was a mistake due to weariness and
jealousy. Then he began to give in. He confessed to some relationships but
backdated  them,  as  for  others,  indisputably  recent,  he  said  they  had  been
meaningless, he swore that with those women it was friendship, not love. We
quarreled all through Christmas, all winter. Sometimes I silenced him, worn
out  by  his  skill  at  accusing  himself,  defending  himself,  and  expecting
forgiveness, sometimes I yielded in the face of his despair, which seemed real—
he often arrived drunk—sometimes I threw him out because, out of honesty,
pride, maybe even dignity, he never promised that he would stop seeing those
he called his friends, nor would he assure me that he would not lengthen the
list.
On that theme he often undertook long, very cultured monologues in which
he tried to convince me that it wasn’t his fault but that of nature, of astral
matter, of spongy bodies and their excessive liquids, of the immoderate heat of
his loins—in short, of his exorbitant virility. No matter how much I add up all
the books I’ve read, he murmured, in a tone that was sincere, pained, and yet
vain to the point of ridiculousness, no matter how much I add up the languages
I’ve learned, the mathematics, the sciences, the literature, and most of all my
love for you—yes, the love and the need I have for you, the terror of not being
able to have you anymore—believe me, I beg you, believe me, there’s nothing
to be done, I can’t I can’t I can’t, the occasional desire, the most foolish, the
most obtuse, prevails.
Sometimes he moved me, more often he irritated me, in general I responded
with sarcasm. And he was silent, he nervously ruffled his hair, then he started
again. But when I said to him coldly one morning that perhaps all that need for
women was the symptom of a labile heterosexuality that in order to endure
needed constant confirmation, he was offended, he harassed me for days, he
wanted to know if I had been better with Antonio than with him. Since I was
now tired of all that distraught talk, I shouted yes. And since in that phase of
excruciating quarrels some of his friends had tried to get into my bed, and I,
out of boredom, out of spite, had sometimes consented, I mentioned names of
people he was fond of, and to wound him I said they had been better than him.
He disappeared. He had said that he couldn’t do without Dede and Elsa, he
had said that he loved Imma more than his other children, he had said that he
would take care of the three children even if I hadn’t wanted to go back to him.
In reality not only did he forget about us immediately but he stopped paying
the  rent  in  Via  Tasso,  along  with  the  bills  for  the  electricity,  the  gas,  the
telephone.
I looked in vain for a cheaper apartment in the area: often, apartments that
were uglier and smaller commanded even higher rents. Then Lila said to me
that there were three rooms and a kitchen available just above her. The rent
was almost nothing, from the windows you could see both the stradone and the
courtyard. She said it in her way, in the tone of someone who signals: I’m only
giving you the information, do as you like. I was depressed, I was frightened.
Elisa had recently yelled at me during a quarrel: Papa is alone, go live with him,
I’m tired of having to take care of him myself. And naturally I had refused, in
my situation I couldn’t take care of my father, too. I was already the slave of
my daughters. Imma was constantly sick, as soon as Dede got over the flu Elsa
had it, she wouldn’t do her homework unless I sat with her, Dede got mad and
said: Then you have to help me, too. I was exhausted, a nervous wreck. And
then, in the great chaos I had fallen into, I didn’t have even that bit of active
life that until then I had guaranteed myself. I turned down invitations and
articles  and  trips,  I  didn’t  dare  answer  the  telephone  for  fear  it  was  the
publisher asking for the book. I had ended up in a vortex that was pulling me
down, and a hypothetical return to the neighborhood would be the proof that I
had  touched  bottom.  To  immerse  myself  again,  and  my  daughters,  in  that
mentality, let myself be absorbed by Lila, by Carmen, by Alfonso, by everyone,
just as in fact they wanted. No, no, I swore to myself that I would go and live in
Tribunali,  in  Duchesca,  in  Lavinaio,  in  Forcella,  amid  the  scaffolding  that
marked the earthquake damage, rather than return to the neighborhood. In
that atmosphere the editor called.
“How far along are you?”
It was an instant, a flame kindled in my head illuminating it like day. I knew
what I had to say and what I had to do.
“I finished just yesterday.”
“Seriously? Send it today.”
“Tomorrow morning I’ll go to the post office.”
“Thank you. As soon as the book arrives, I’ll read it and let you know.”
“Take your time.”
I hung up. I went to a big box I kept in the bedroom closet, I pulled out the
typescript that years before neither Adele nor Lila had liked, I didn’t even
attempt to reread it. The next morning I took the children to school and went
with Imma to send the package. I knew that it was a risky move, but it seemed
to me the only one possible to save my reputation. I had promised to deliver a
novel and here it was. Was it an unsuccessful novel, irrefutably bad? Well, it
wouldn’t be published. But I had worked hard, I hadn’t deceived anyone, I
would soon do better.
The  line  at  the  post  office  was  exhausting,  I  had  to  protest  continually
against  people  who  didn’t  respect  it.  In  that  situation  my  disaster  became
obvious to me. Why am I here, why am I wasting time like this. The girls and Naples
have eaten me alive. I don’t study, I don’t write, I’ve lost all discipline. I had gained a
life very far from what might have been expected for me, and look how I had
ended up. I felt exasperated, guilty toward myself and especially toward my
mother. Furthermore, Imma had been making me anxious: when I compared
her with Tina I was sure she was suffering from some developmental problem.
Lila’s daughter, although she was three weeks younger, was very lively, seemed
more than a year old, whereas Imma seemed unresponsive and had a vacant
look. I observed her obsessively, I harassed her with tests that I invented on
the spot. I thought: it would be terrible if Nino not only had ruined my life but
had given me a daughter with problems. And yet people stopped me on the
street because she was so plump, so fair. Here, even at the post office, the
women in line complimented her, how chubby she was. But she didn’t even
smile. A man offered her a candy and Imma stretched out her hand reluctantly,
took it, dropped it. Ah, I was constantly anxious, every day a new worry was
added to the others. When I came out of the post office and the package had
been sent and there was no way to stop it, I jumped, I remembered my mother-
in-law. Good Lord, what had I done. Was it possible that I hadn’t considered
that the publisher would give the manuscript to Adele? It was she, after all,
who had wanted the publication of both my first book and the second, they
owed it to her if only out of courtesy. And she would say: Greco is cheating you,
this isn’t a new text, I read it years ago and it’s terrible. I broke out in a cold
sweat, I felt weak. To plug one leak I had created another. I was no longer able
to keep under control, even within the limits of the possible, the chain of my
actions.
80.
Just then, to complicate things, Nino showed up again. He had never given
me  back  the  keys,  even  though  I  had  insisted  on  having  them,  and  so  he
reappeared without calling, without knocking. I told him to go, the house was
mine, he wasn’t paying the rent and wasn’t giving me a cent for Imma. He
swore that, annihilated by grief at our separation, he had forgotten. He seemed
sincere;  he  had  a  feverish  look,  and  was  very  thin.  He  promised  with  an
involuntarily comical solemnity to start paying the next month, he spoke in a
sorrowful voice of his love for Imma. Then, apparently in a good-humored way,
he began to ask again about my encounter with Antonio, about how it had
gone, first in general and then sexually. From Antonio he moved on to his
friends. He tried to make me admit that I had yielded (“yield” seemed to him
the right verb) to this one or that one not out of genuine attraction but only
out of spite. I was alarmed when he began to caress my shoulder, my knee, my
cheek. I soon saw—in his eyes and in his words—that what made him desperate
was not that he had lost my love but that I had been with those other men, and
that sooner or later I would be with others and would prefer them to him. He
had showed up, that morning, only to reenter my bed. He demanded that I
vilify  those  recent  lovers  by  showing  him  that  my  only  desire  was  to  be
penetrated again by him. He wanted, in other words, to reassert his primacy,
then surely he would again disappear. I managed to get the keys back and I
threw  him  out.  I  realized  then,  and  to  my  surprise,  that  I  no  longer  felt
anything for him. The long time that I had loved him dissolved conclusively
that morning.
The next day I began to ask about what I had to do to get a job, even as a
substitute, in the middle schools. I quickly realized that it wouldn’t be simple,
and that in any case I would have to wait for the new school year. Since I took
for  granted  the  break  with  the  publisher,  which  was  followed  in  my
imagination  by  the  devastating  collapse  of  my  identity  as  a  writer,  I  was
frightened. From birth, the children had been used to a comfortable life, I
myself—ever  since  my  marriage  to  Pietro—couldn’t  imagine  being  without
books,  magazines,  newspapers,  records,  movies,  theater.  I  had  to  think
immediately of some provisional job, and I put advertisements in the local
shops offering private lessons.
Then one morning in June the editor called. He had received the manuscript,
he had read it.
“Already?” I said with feigned indifference.
“Yes. And it’s a book that I would never have expected from you, but that
you, surprisingly, wrote.”
“You’re saying it’s bad?”
“It is, from the first line to the last, pure pleasure of narration.”
My heart was going crazy in my chest.
“Is it good or not?”
“It’s extraordinary.”
81.
I was proud. In a few seconds I not only regained faith in myself, I relaxed, I
began to speak of my work with a childish enthusiasm, I laughed too much, I
questioned  the  editor  closely  to  get  a  more  articulated  approval.  I  quickly
understood  that  he  had  read  my  pages  as  a  sort  of  autobiography,  an
arrangement in novel form of my experience of the poorest and most violent
Naples. He said he had feared the negative effects of a return to my city, but
now he had to admit that that return had helped me. I didn’t say that the book
had  been  written  several  years  earlier  in  Florence.  It’s  a  harsh  novel,  he
emphasized, I would say masculine, but paradoxically also delicate, in other
words  a  big  step  forward.  Then  he  discussed  organizational  questions.  He
wanted to move the publication to the spring of 1983 to devote himself to
careful editing and to prepare the launch. He concluded, with some sarcasm:
“I talked about it with your ex-mother-in-law. She said that she had read an
old version and hadn’t liked it; but evidently either her taste has aged or your
personal problems kept her from giving a dispassionate evaluation.”
I quickly admitted that long ago I had let Adele read a first draft. He said: It’s
clear that the air of Naples has given free rein to your talent. When he hung up
I felt hugely relieved. I changed, I became particularly affectionate toward my
daughters.  The  publisher  paid  the  rest  of  the  advance  and  my  economic
situation improved. Suddenly I began to look at the city and especially at the
neighborhood as an important part of my life; not only should I not dismiss it
but it was essential to the success of my work. It was a sudden leap, going from
distrust to a joyful sense of myself. What I had felt as a precipice not only
acquired literary nobility but seemed to me a determined choice of a cultural
and  political  arena.  The  editor  himself  had  sanctioned  it  authoritatively,
saying: For you, returning to the point of departure has been a step forward. Of
course, I hadn’t said that the book was written in Florence, that the return to
Naples had had no influence on the text. But the narrative material, the human
depth of the characters came from the neighborhood, and surely the turning
point was there. Adele hadn’t had the sensitivity to understand, so she had
lost. All the Airotas had lost. Nino had lost, too, as in essence he had considered
me one of the women on his list, without distinguishing me from the others.
And—what for me was even more significant—Lila had lost. She hadn’t liked
my book, she had been severe, it was one of the few times in her life she had
cried, when she had had to wound me with her negative judgment. But I didn’t
want it from her, rather I was pleased that she was wrong. From childhood I
had given her too much importance, and now I felt as if unburdened. Finally it
was clear that what I was wasn’t her, and vice versa. Her authority was no
longer necessary to me, I had my own. I felt strong, no longer a victim of my
origins but capable of dominating them, of giving them a shape, of taking
revenge on them for myself, for Lila, for whomever. What before was dragging
me down was now the material for climbing higher. One morning in July of
1982 I called her and said:
“All  right,  I’ll  take  the  apartment  above  you,  I’m  coming  back  to  the
neighborhood.”
82.
I moved in midsummer, Antonio took care of the logistics. He assembled
some brawny men who emptied the apartment on Via Tasso and arranged
everything in the apartment in the neighborhood. The new house was dark
and repainting the rooms didn’t help brighten it. But, contrary to what I had
thought since I returned to Naples, this didn’t bother me; in fact the dusty light
that had always struggled to penetrate the windows had the effect on me of an
evocative childhood memory. Dede and Elsa, on the other hand, protested at
length. They had grown up in Florence, Genoa, in the bright light of Via Tasso,
and  they  immediately  hated  the  floors  of  uneven  tiles,  the  small  dark
bathroom, the din of the stradone. They resigned themselves only because now
they could enjoy some not insignificant advantages: see Aunt Lina every day,
get up later because the school was nearby, go there by themselves, spend time
on the street and in the courtyard.
I  was  immediately  seized  by  a  yearning  to  regain  possession  of  the
neighborhood. I enrolled Elsa in the elementary school where I had gone and
Dede in my middle school. I resumed contact with anyone, old or young, who
remembered me. I celebrated my decision with Carmen and her family, with
Alfonso, with Ada, with Pinuccia. Naturally I had misgivings, and Pietro, who
was  very  unhappy  with  the  decision,  made  them  worse.  He  said  on  the
telephone:
“On the basis of what criteria do you want to bring up our daughters in a
place that you fled?”
“I won’t bring them up here.”
“But you’ve taken a house and enrolled them in school without considering
that they deserve something else.”
“I have a book to finish and I can only do it well here.”
“I could have taken them.”
“You would also take Imma? All three are my daughters and I don’t want the
third to be separated from the other two.”
He calmed down. He was happy that I had left Nino and he soon forgave the
move. Keep at your work, he said, I have confidence in you, you know what
you’re doing. I hoped it was true. I watched the trucks that passed noisily along
the stradone, raising dust. I walked in the gardens that were full of syringes. I
went into the neglected, empty church. I felt sad in front of the parish cinema,
which had closed, in front of the party offices, which were like abandoned
dens. I listened to the shouting of men, women, children in the apartments,
especially  at  night.  The  feuds  between  families,  the  hostilities  between
neighbors, the ease with which things came to blows, the wars between gangs
of boys. When I went to the pharmacy I remembered Gino; I felt revulsion at
the sight of the place where he had been killed, and went cautiously around it.
I spoke compassionately to his parents, who were still behind the old dark-
wood counter, more bent over, white-haired in their white smocks, and as kind
as ever. As a child I endured all this, I thought, let’s see if now I can control it.
“How is it that you decided to do it?” Lila asked some time after the move.
Maybe she wanted an affectionate answer, or maybe a sort of recognition of
the validity of her choices, words like: You were right to stay, going out into
the world was of no use, now I understand. Instead I answered:
“It’s an experiment.”
“Experiment in what?”
We were in her office. Tina was near her, Imma was wandering on her own. I
said:
“An experiment in recomposition. You’ve managed to have your whole life
here, but not me: I feel I’m in pieces scattered all over.”
She had an expression of disapproval.
“Forget these experiments, Lenù, otherwise you’ll be disappointed and leave
again. I’m also in pieces. Between my father’s shoe repair shop and this office
it’s only a few meters, but it’s as if they were at the North Pole and the South
Pole.”
I said, pretending to be amused:
“Don’t discourage me. In my job I have to paste one fact to another with
words, and in the end everything has to seem coherent even if it’s not.”
“But if the coherence isn’t there, why pretend?”
“To create order. Remember the novel I gave you to read and you didn’t
like? There I tried to set what I know about Naples within what I later learned
in Pisa, Florence, Milan. Now I’ve given it to the publisher and he thought it
was good. It’s being published.”
She narrowed her eyes. She said softly:
“I told you that I don’t understand anything.”
I felt I had wounded her. It was as if I had thrown it in her face: if you can’t
connect your story of the shoes with the story of the computers, that doesn’t
mean that it can’t be done, it means only that you don’t have the tools to do it.
I said hastily: You’ll see, no one will buy the book and you’ll be right. Then I
listed somewhat randomly all the defects that I myself attributed to my text,
and what I wanted to keep or change before it was published. But she escaped,
it was as if she wanted to regain altitude, she started talking about computers
and she did it as if to point out: You have your things, I mine. She said to the
children: Do you want to see a new machine that Enzo bought?
She led us into a small room. She explained to Dede and Elsa: This machine is
called a personal computer, it costs a lot of money but it can do wonderful
things, look how it works. She sat on a stool and first she settled Tina on her
knees, then she began patiently to explain every element, speaking to Dede, to
Elsa, to the baby, never to me.
I looked at Tina the whole time. She talked to her mother, asked, pointing:
What’s this, and if her mother didn’t pay attention she tugged on the edge of
her shirt, grabbed her chin, insisted: Mamma, what’s this. Lila explained it to
her as if she were an adult. Imma wandered around the room, pulling a little
wagon, and sometimes she sat down on the floor, disoriented. Come, Imma, I
said, over and over, listen to what Aunt Lina is saying. But she continued to
play with the wagon.
My daughter did not have the qualities of Lila’s daughter. A few days earlier
the anxiety that she was in some way retarded had dissipated. I had taken her
to a very good pediatrician, the child showed no retardation of any sort. I was
reassured. And yet comparing Imma to Tina continued to make me uneasy.
How lively Tina was: to see her, to hear her talk put you in a good mood. And to
see mother and daughter together was touching. As long as Lila talked about
the computer—we were starting then to use that word—I observed them both
with admiration. At that moment I felt happy, satisfied with myself, and so I
also felt, very clearly, that I loved my friend for how she was, for her virtues
and her flaws, for everything, even for that being she had brought into the
world. The child was full of curiosity, she learned everything in an instant, she
had a large vocabulary and a surprising manual dexterity. I said to myself: She
has little of Enzo, she’s like Lila, look how she widens her eyes, narrows them,
look at the ears that have no lobe. I still didn’t dare to admit that Tina attracted
me more than my daughter, but when that demonstration of skill ended, I was
very excited about the computer, and full of praise for the little girl, even
though I knew that Imma might suffer from it (How clever you are, how pretty,
how well you speak, how many things you learn), I complimented Lila, mainly to
diminish the unease I had caused her by announcing the publication of my
book, and, finally, I drew an optimistic portrait of the future that awaited my
three daughters and hers. They’ll study, I said, they’ll travel all over the world,
goodness knows what they’ll be. But Lila, after smothering Tina with kisses—
yes, she’s sooo clever—replied bitterly: Gennaro was clever, too, he spoke well, he
read, he was very good in school, and look at him now.
83.
One night when Lila was speaking disparagingly of Gennaro, Dede gathered
her courage and defended him. She became red-faced, she said: He’s extremely
intelligent. Lila looked at her with interest, smiled, replied: You’re very nice,
I’m his mamma and what you say gives me great pleasure.
From then on Dede felt authorized to defend Gennaro on every occasion,
even  when  Lila  was  very  angry  at  him.  Gennaro  was  now  a  large  boy  of
eighteen, with a handsome face, like his father’s as a youth, but he was stockier
and had a surly nature. He didn’t even notice Dede, who was twelve, he had
other things on his mind. But she never stopped thinking of him as the most
astonishing human creature who had ever appeared on the face of the earth
and whenever she could she sang his praises. Sometimes Lila was in a bad
mood and didn’t respond. But on other occasions she laughed, she exclaimed:
Certainly not, he’s a delinquent. You three sisters, on the other hand, you’re
clever, you’ll be better than your mother. And Dede, although pleased with the
compliment (when she could consider herself better than me she was happy),
immediately began to belittle herself in order to elevate Gennaro.
She adored him. She would often sit at the window to watch for his return
from the shop, shouting at him as soon as he appeared: Hi, Rino. If he answered
hi (usually he didn’t) she hurried to the landing to wait for him to come up the
stairs and then tried to start a serious conversation, like: You’re tired, what did
you do to your hand, aren’t you hot in those overalls, things of that sort. Even a
few words from him excited her. If she happened to get more attention than
usual, in order to prolong it she grabbed Imma and said: I’m taking her down to
Aunt Lina, so she can play with Tina. I didn’t have time to give her permission
before she was out of the house.
Never had so little space separated Lila and me, not even when we were
children. My floor was her ceiling. Two flights of stairs down brought me to
her house, two up brought her to mine. In the morning, in the evening, I heard
their  voices:  the  indistinct  sounds  of  conversations,  Tina’s  trills  that  Lila
responded to as if she, too, were trilling, the thick tonality of Enzo, who, silent
as he was, spoke a lot to his daughter, and often sang to her. I supposed that
the signs of my presence also reached Lila. When she was at work, when my
older daughters were at school, when only Imma and Tina—who often stayed
with  me,  sometimes  even  to  sleep—were  at  home,  I  noticed  the  emptiness
below, I listened for the footsteps of Lila and Enzo returning.
Things soon took a turn for the better. Dede and Elsa frequently looked after
Imma; they carried her down to the courtyard with them or to Lila’s. If I had to
go out Lila took care of all three. It was years since I had had so much time
available. I read, I revised my book, I was at ease without Nino and free of the
anxiety of losing him. Also my relationship with Pietro improved. He came to
Naples more often to see the girls, he got used to the small, dreary apartment
and  to  their  Neapolitan  accents,  Elsa’s  especially,  and  he  often  stayed
overnight. At those times, he was polite to Enzo, and talked a lot to Lila. Even
though in the past Pietro had had definitely negative opinions of her, it seemed
clear that he was happy to spend time in her company. As for Lila, as soon as
he left she began to talk about him with an enthusiasm she rarely showed for
anyone.  How  many  books  must  he  have  studied,  she  said  seriously,  fifty
thousand,  a  hundred  thousand?  I  think  she  saw  in  my  ex-husband  the
incarnation of her childhood fantasies about people who read and write for
knowledge, not as a profession.
“You’re  very  smart,”  she  said  to  me  one  evening,  “but  he  has  a  way  of
speaking that I truly like: he puts the writing into his voice, but he doesn’t
speak like a printed book.”
“I do?” I asked, as a joke.
“A little.”
“Even now?”
“Yes.”
“If I hadn’t learned to speak like that I would never have had any respect,
outside of here.”
“He’s like you, but more natural. When Gennaro was little, I thought—even
though I didn’t know Pietro yet—I thought I’d want him to become just like
that.”
She often talked about her son. She said she should have given him more,
but  she  hadn’t  had  time,  or  consistency,  or  ability.  She  accused  herself  of
having taught him the little she could and of having then lost confidence and
stopped.  One  night  she  went  from  her  first  child  to  the  second  without
interruption. She was afraid that Tina, too, as she grew up would be a waste. I
praised Tina, sincerely, and she said in a serious tone:
“Now that you’re here you have to help her become like your daughters. It’s
important to Enzo, too, he told me to ask you.”
“All right.”
“You help me, I’ll help you. School isn’t enough, you remember Maestra
Oliviero, with me it wasn’t enough.”
“They were different times.”
“I don’t know. I gave Gennaro what was possible, but it went badly.”
“It’s the fault of the neighborhood.”
She looked at me gravely, she said:
“I don’t have much faith in it, but since you’ve decided to stay here with us,
let’s change the neighborhood.”
84.
In a few months we became very close. We got in the habit of going out
together to do the shopping, and on Sundays, rather than strolling amid the
stalls on the stradone, we insisted on going to the center of town with Enzo so
that our daughters could have the sun and the sea air. We walked along Via
Caracciolo  or  in  the  Villa  Comunale.  He  carried  Tina  on  his  shoulders,  he
pampered her, maybe too much. But he never forgot my daughters, he bought
balloons,  sweets,  he  played  with  them.  Lila  and  I  stayed  behind  them  on
purpose. We talked about everything, but not the way we had as adolescents:
those times would never return. She asked questions about things she had
heard on television and I answered volubly. I talked about the postmodern, the
problems of publishing, the latest news of feminism, whatever came into my
mind,  and  Lila  listened  attentively,  her  expression  just  slightly  ironic,
interrupting  only  to  ask  for  further  explanations,  never  to  say  what  she
thought. I liked talking to her. I liked her look of admiration, I liked it when she
said: How many things you know, how many things you think, even when I felt
she was teasing. If I pressed for her opinion she retreated, saying: No, don’t
make me say something stupid, you talk. Often she asked me about famous
people, to find out if I knew them, and when I said no she was disappointed.
She  was  also  disappointed—I  should  say—when  I  reduced  to  ordinary
dimensions well-known people I’d had dealings with.
“So,” she concluded one morning, “those people aren’t what they seem.”
“Not at all. Often they’re good at their work. But otherwise they’re greedy,
they like hurting you, they’re allied with the strong and they persecute the
weak, they form gangs to fight other gangs, they treat women like dogs on a
leash, they’ll utter obscenities and put their hands on you exactly the way they
do on the buses here.”
“You’re exaggerating?”
“No, to produce ideas you don’t have to be a saint. And anyway there are
very  few  true  intellectuals.  The  mass  of  the  educated  spend  their  lives
commenting lazily on the ideas of others. They engage their best energies in
sadistic practices against every possible rival.”
“Then why are you with them?”
I answered: I’m not with them, I’m here. I wanted her to feel that I was part
of  an  upper-class  world  and  yet  different.  She  herself  pushed  me  in  that
direction. She was amused if I was sarcastic about my colleagues. Sometimes I
had the impression that she insisted so that I would confirm that I really was
one of those who told people how things stood and what they should think.
The decision to live in the neighborhood made sense to her only if I continued
to count myself among those who wrote books, contributed to magazines and
newspapers, appeared sometimes on television. She wanted me as her friend,
her neighbor, provided I had that aura. And I supported her. Her approval gave
me confidence. I was beside her in the Villa Comunale, with our daughters, and
yet I was definitively different, I had a wide-ranging life. It flattered me to feel
that, compared to her, I was a woman of great experience and I felt that she,
too,  was  pleased  with  what  I  was.  I  told  her  about  France,  Germany,  and
Austria, about the United States, the debates I had taken part in, here and
there, the men there had been recently, after Nino. She was attentive to every
word with a half smile, never saying what she thought. Not even the story of
my occasional relationships set off in her a need to confide.
“Are you happy with Enzo?” I asked one morning.
“Enough.”
“And you’ve never been interested in someone else?”
“No.”
“Do you really love him?”
“Enough.”
There was no way of getting anything else out of her, it was I who talked
about  sex  and  often  in  an  explicit  way.  My  ramblings,  her  silences.  Yet,
whatever the subject, during those walks, something was released from her
very body that enthralled me, stimulating my brain as it always had, helping
me reflect.
Maybe that was why I sought her out. She continued to emit an energy that
gave  comfort,  that  reinforced  a  purpose,  that  spontaneously  suggested
solutions. It was a force that struck not only me. Sometimes she invited me to
dinner with the children, more often I invited her, with Enzo and, naturally,
Tina. Gennaro, no, there was nothing to be done, he often stayed out and came
home late at night. Enzo—I soon realized—was worried about him, whereas Lila
said: He’s grown-up, let him do as he likes. But I felt she spoke that way to
reduce  her  partner’s  anxiety.  And  the  tone  was  identical  to  that  of  our
conversations.  Enzo  nodded,  something  passed  from  her  to  him  like  an
invigorating tonic.
It was no different on the streets of the neighborhood. Going shopping with
her  never  ceased  to  amaze  me:  she  had  become  an  authority.  She  was
constantly stopped, people drew her aside with a respectful familiarity, they
whispered something to her, and she listened, without reacting. Did they treat
her  like  that  because  of  the  success  she  had  had  with  her  new  business?
Because she gave off the sense of someone who could do anything? Or because,
now that she was nearly forty, the energy she had always had imbued her with
the aura of a magician who cast spells and instilled fear? I don’t know. Of
course it struck me that people paid more attention to her than to me. I was a
well-known writer and the publishing house was making sure that, in view of
my new book, I was often mentioned in the newspapers: the Repubblica had
come out with a fairly large photograph of me to illustrate a short article on
forthcoming books, which at a certain point said: Highly anticipated is the new
novel by Elena Greco, a story set in an unknown Naples, with bloodred colors, et cetera.
And yet next to her, in the place where we were born, I was only a decoration,
that is, I bore witness to Lila’s merits. Those who had known us from birth
attributed to her, to the force of her attraction, the fact that the neighborhood
could have on its streets an esteemed person like me.
85.
I  think  there  were  many  who  wondered  why  I,  who  in  the  newspapers
seemed rich and famous, had come to live in a wretched apartment, situated in
an increasingly run-down area. Maybe the first not to understand were my
daughters. Dede came home from school one day disgusted: “An old man peed
in our doorway.”
Another  day  Elsa  arrived  terrified:  “Today  someone  was  knifed  in  the
gardens.”
At  such  times  I  was  afraid.  The  part  of  me  that  had  long  ago  left  the
neighborhood  was  indignant,  was  worried  about  the  children,  and  said,
Enough. At home, Dede and Elsa spoke a good Italian, but occasionally I heard
them  from  the  window  or  coming  up  the  stairs,  and  I  realized  that  Elsa
especially used a very aggressive, sometimes obscene dialect. I reprimanded
her, she pretended to be sorry. But I knew that it took a lot of self-discipline to
resist the lure of bad behavior and so many other temptations. Was it possible
that while I was devoting myself to making literature they were getting lost? I
calmed  myself  by  repeating  the  temporal  limit  of  this  stay:  after  the
publication of my book I would definitively leave Naples. I said it to myself and
said it again: I needed only to reach a final draft of the novel.
The book was undoubtedly benefiting from everything that came from the
neighborhood. But the work proceeded so well mainly because I was attentive
to Lila, who had remained completely within that environment. Her voice, her
gaze,  her  gestures,  her  meanness  and  her  generosity,  her  dialect  were  all
intimately connected to our place of birth. Even Basic Sight, in spite of the
exotic  name  (people  called  her  office  basissìt),  didn’t  seem  some  sort  of
meteorite that had fallen from outer space but rather the unexpected product
of poverty, violence, and blight. Thus, drawing on her to give truth to my story
seemed indispensable. Afterward I would leave for good, I intended to move to
Milan.
I had only to sit in her office for a while to understand the background
against  which  she  moved.  I  looked  at  her  brother,  who  was  now  openly
consumed by drugs. I looked at Ada, who was crueler every day, the sworn
enemy of Marisa, who had taken Stefano away from her. I looked at Alfonso—in
whose face, in whose habits, the feminine and the masculine continually broke
boundaries with effects that one day repelled me, the next moved me, and
always alarmed me—who often had a black eye or a split lip because of the
beatings he got, who knows where, who knows when. I looked at Carmen, who,
in the blue jacket of a gas-pump attendant, drew Lila aside and interrogated
her  like  an  oracle.  I  looked  at  Antonio,  who  hovered  around  her  with
unfinished  sentences  or  stood  in  a  serene  silence  when  he  brought  to  the
office,  as  if  on  a  courtesy  visit,  his  beautiful  German  wife,  the  children.
Meanwhile I picked up endless rumors. Stefano Carracci is about to close the
grocery, he doesn’t have a lira, he needs money. It was Pasquale Peluso who
kidnapped so-and-so, and if it wasn’t him he certainly has something to do
with it. That other so-and-so set fire to the shirt factory in Afragola by himself
to fuck the insurance company. Watch out for Dede, they’re giving children
drugged candy. There’s a faggot hanging around the elementary school who
lures  children  away.  The  Solaras  are  opening  a  night  club  in  the  new
neighborhood, women and drugs, the music will be so loud that no one will
sleep again. Big trucks pass by on the stradone at night, transporting stuff that
can destroy us faster than the atomic bomb. Gennaro has started hanging out
with a bad crowd, and, if he continues like that, I won’t even let him go to
work. The person they found murdered in the tunnel looked like a woman but
was a man: there was so much blood in the body that it flowed all the way
down to the gas pump.
I observed, I listened, from the vantage point of what Lila and I as children
had imagined becoming and what I had actually become: the author of a big
book  that  I  was  polishing—or  at  times  rewriting—and  that  would  soon  be
published. In the first draft—I said to myself—I put too much dialect. And I
erased it, rewrote. Then it seemed that I had put in too little and I added some.
I was in the neighborhood and yet safe in that role, within that setting. The
ambitious work justified my presence there and, as long as I was occupied with
it, gave meaning to the poor light in the rooms, the rough voices of the street,
the risks that the children ran, the traffic on the stradone that raised dust when
the weather was good and water and mud when it rained, Lila and Enzo’s
swarm of clients, small provincial entrepreneurs, big luxury cars, clothes of a
vulgar wealth, heavy bodies that moved sometimes aggressively, sometimes
with servile manners.
Once  when  I  was  waiting  for  Lila  at  Basic  Sight  with  Imma  and  Tina,
everything seemed to become clearer: Lila was doing new work but totally
immersed in our old world. I heard her shouting at a client in an extremely
crude way about a question of money. I was shaken, where had the woman
who graciously emanated authority suddenly gone? Enzo hurried in, and the
man—a small man around sixty, with an enormous belly—went away cursing.
Afterward I said to Lila: “Who are you really?”
“In what sense?”
“If you don’t want to talk about it, forget it.”
“No, let’s talk, but explain what you mean.”
“I mean: in an environment like this, with the people you have to deal with,
how do you behave?”
“I’m careful, like everyone.”
“That’s all?”
“Well, I’m careful and I move things around in order to make them go the
way I say. Haven’t we always behaved that way?”
“Yes, but now we have responsibilities, toward ourselves and our children.
Didn’t you say we have to change the neighborhood?”
“And to change it what do you think needs to be done?”
“Resort to the law.”
I was startled myself by what I was saying. I made a speech in which I was, to
my surprise, even more legalistic than my ex-husband and, in many ways,
more than Nino. Lila said teasingly: “The law is fine when you’re dealing with
people who pay attention if you merely say the word ‘law’. But you know how
it is here.”
“And so?”
“So if people have no fear of the law, you have to instill the fear yourself. We
did a lot of work for that shit you saw before, in fact a huge amount, but he
won’t pay, he says he has no money. I threatened him, I told him: I’ll sue you.
And he answered: Sue me, who gives a damn.”
“But you’ll sue him.”
She  laughed:  “I’ll  never  see  my  money  that  way.  Some  time  ago,  an
accountant stole millions from us. We fired him and filed charges. But the law
didn’t lift a finger.”
“So?”
“I was fed up with waiting and I asked Antonio. The money was returned
immediately. And this money, too, will return, without a trial, without lawyers,
and without judges.”
86.
So  Antonio  did  that  sort  of  work  for  Lila.  Not  for  money  but  out  of
friendship, or personal respect. Or, I don’t know, maybe she asked Michele if
she could borrow him, since Antonio worked for Michele, and Michele, who
agreed to everything Lila asked, let her.
But did Michele really satisfy her every request? If it had certainly been true
before I moved to the neighborhood, now it wasn’t clear if things really were
like that. First I noticed some odd signs: Lila no longer uttered Michele’s name
with condescension but, rather, with irritation or obvious concern; mainly,
though, he hardly ever appeared at Basic Sight.
It  was  at  the  wedding  celebration  of  Marcello  and  Elisa,  which  was
ostentatious and lavish, that I became aware something had changed. During
the entire reception Marcello stayed close to his brother; he often whispered
to him, they laughed together, he put an arm around his shoulders. As for
Michele,  he  seemed  revived.  He  had  returned  to  making  long,  pompous
speeches, as he used to, while the children and Gigliola, now extraordinarily
fat, sat obediently beside him, as if they had decided to forget the way he had
treated them. It struck me how the vulgarity, which was still very provincial at
the  time  of  Lila’s  wedding,  had  been  as  if  modernized.  It  had  become  a
metropolitan vulgarity, and Lila herself was appropriate to it, in her habits, in
her language, in her clothes. Nothing clashed, in other words, except for me
and my daughters, who with our sobriety were completely out of place in that
triumph of excessive colors, excessive laughter, excessive luxuries.
Perhaps that was why Michele’s burst of rage was especially alarming. He
was making a speech in honor of the newlyweds, but meanwhile little Tina was
claiming something that Imma had taken away from her, and was screaming in
the middle of the room. He was talking, Tina was crying. Suddenly Michele
broke off and, with the eyes of a madman, shouted: Fuck, Lina, will you shut
that piece of shit kid up? Like that, exactly in those words. Lila stared at him
for a long second. She didn’t speak, she didn’t move. Very slowly, she placed
one hand on the hand of Enzo, who was sitting next to her. I quickly got up
from my table and took the two little girls outside.
The episode roused the bride, that is to say, my sister Elisa. At the end of the
speech,  when  the  sound  of  applause  reached  me,  she  came  out,  in  her
extravagant white dress. She said cheerfully: My brother-in-law has returned
to himself. Then she added: But he shouldn’t treat babies like that. She picked
up Imma and Tina, and, laughing and joking returned to the hall with the two
children. I followed her, confused.
For a while I thought that she, too, had returned to herself. Elisa in fact did
change greatly, after her marriage, as if what had ruined her had been the
absence, until that moment, of the marriage bond. She became a calm mother,
a tranquil yet firm wife, her hostility toward me ended. Now when I went to
her house with my daughters and, often, Tina, she welcomed me politely and
was affectionate with the children. Even Marcello—when I ran into him—was
courteous. He called me the sister-in-law who writes novels (How is the sister-in-
law who writes novels?), said a cordial word or two, and disappeared. The house
was always tidy, and Elisa and Silvio welcomed us dressed as if for a party. But
my sister as a little girl—I soon realized—had vanished forever. The marriage
had inaugurated a completely fake Signora Solara, never an intimate word,
only a good-humored tone and a smile, all copied from her husband. I made an
effort to be loving, with her and especially with my nephew. But I didn’t find
Silvio appealing, he was too much like Marcello, and Elisa must have realized
it. One afternoon she turned bitter again for a few minutes. She said: You love
Lina’s child more than mine. I swore it wasn’t true, I hugged the child, kissed
him. But she shook her head, whispered: Besides, you went to live near Lina
and not near me or Papa. She continued, in other words, to be angry with me
and now also with our brothers. I think she accused them of behaving like
ingrates. They lived and worked in Baiano and they weren’t even in touch with
Marcello, who had been so generous with them. Family ties, said Elisa, you
think  they’re  strong,  but  no.  She  talked  as  if  she  were  stating  a  universal
principle, then she added: To keep from breaking those ties, you need, as my
husband has shown, goodwill. Michele had turned into an idiot, but Marcello
restored his mind to him: Did you notice what a great speech he made at my
wedding?
87.
Michele’s  return  to  his  senses  was  marked  not  only  by  a  return  to  his
flowery speech but also by the absence among the guests of a person who
during that period of crisis had been very close to him: Alfonso. Not to be
invited was for my former schoolmate a source of great suffering. For days he
did nothing but complain, asking aloud how he had wronged the Solaras. I
worked for them for so many years, he said, and they didn’t invite me. Then
something happened that caused a sensation. One evening he came to dinner
at my house with Lila and Enzo, very depressed. But Alfonso, who had never
dressed as a woman in my presence except the day he tried on the maternity
dress in the shop on Via Chiaia, arrived in women’s clothes, leaving Dede and
Elsa speechless. He was troublesome all evening; he drank a lot. He asked Lila
obsessively: Am I getting fat, am I getting ugly, do I not look like you anymore?
And Enzo: Who’s prettier, her or me? At a certain point he complained that he
had a blocked intestine, that he had a terrible pain in what—addressing the
girls—he called his ass. And he began to insist that I look and see what was
wrong. Look at my ass, he said, laughing in an obscene way, and Dede stared at
him in bewilderment, Elsa tried to stifle a laugh. Enzo and Lila had to take him
away in a hurry.
But  Alfonso  didn’t  calm  down.  The  next  day,  without  makeup,  in  male
clothes, eyes red with crying, he left Basic Sight saying that he was going to
have a coffee at the Bar Solara. At the entrance he met Michele, and they said
something to each other. Michele, after a few minutes, began to punch and
kick him, then he grabbed the pole that was used to lower the shutter and beat
him  methodically,  for  a  long  time.  Alfonso  returned  to  the  office  badly
battered, but he couldn’t stop repeating: It’s my fault, I don’t how to control
myself. Control in what way we couldn’t understand. Certainly, he got even
worse, and Lila seemed worried. For days she tried in vain to soothe Enzo, who
couldn’t bear the violence of the strong against the weak, and wanted to go to
Michele to see if he could beat him, Enzo, the way he had beaten Alfonso. From
my apartment I heard Lila saying: Stop it, you’re frightening Tina.
88.
January arrived, and my book was now enriched by echoes of many small
details of the neighborhood. A great anguish came over me. When I was at the
last stage of proofs I timidly asked Lila if she had the patience to reread it (It’s
very changed) but she answered decisively no. I didn’t read the last one you
published, she said, those are things in which I have no expertise. I felt alone,
at the mercy of my own pages, and I was even tempted to call Nino to ask if he
would do me a favor and read it. Then I realized that, although he knew my
address and phone number, he had never appeared, in all those months he had
ignored both me and his daughter. So I gave up. The text moved beyond the
final provisional stage and disappeared. Separating from it frightened me, I
would  see  it  again  only  in  its  definitive  guise,  and  every  word  would  be
irremediable.
The  publicity  office  telephoned.  Gina  said:  at  Panorama  they’ve  read  the
proofs and are very interested, they’ll send a photographer. Suddenly I missed
the  elegant  apartment  on  Via  Tasso.  I  thought:  I  don’t  want  to  be
photographed again at the entrance of the tunnel, or in this dreary apartment,
or even in the gardens, amid the syringes of the addicts; I’m not the girl of
fifteen years ago, this is my third book, I want to be treated properly. But Gina
insisted, the book had to be promoted. I told her: Give the photographer my
phone number—I wanted at least to be notified ahead of time, attend to my
appearance, put off the meeting if I didn’t feel in good shape.
In  those  days  I  tried  to  keep  the  house  in  order,  but  no  one  called.  I
concluded that there were already enough photographs of me around and that
Panorama had decided not to do the article. But one morning, when Dede and
Elsa were at school and I was sitting on the floor, in jeans and a worn-out
sweater, my hair uncombed, playing with Imma and Tina, the doorbell rang.
The  two  little  girls  were  building  a  castle  with  blocks  that  were  scattered
around, and I was helping them. In the past few months it had seemed to me
that  the  distance  between  my  daughter  and  Lila’s  had  been  bridged:  they
collaborated on the construction with precise gestures, and if Tina appeared
more imaginative and often asked me surprising questions in a pure Italian,
always clearly pronounced, Imma was more decisive, maybe more disciplined,
and her only disadvantage was a constricted language that we often needed
her  friend  to  decipher.  Since  I  delayed  going  to  the  door  as  I  finished
answering some question or other of Tina’s, there was a commanding ring. I
opened the door and found myself facing a beautiful woman of around thirty,
with blond curls, a long blue raincoat. She was the photographer.
She turned out to be a very gregarious Milanese, expensively dressed. I lost
your  number,  she  said,  but  just  as  well—the  less  you  expect  to  be
photographed the better the photos. She looked around. What a job to get
here, what a wretched place, but it’s exactly what’s needed: are these your
babies? Tina smiled at her, Imma didn’t, but it was obvious that they both
considered her a kind of fairy. I introduced them: Imma is my daughter and
Tina the daughter of a friend. But even as I was speaking, the photographer
began to wander around, snapping photos constantly with different cameras
and all her equipment. I have to pull myself together, I tried to say. Not at all,
you’re fine like that.
She pushed me into every part of the house: the kitchen, the children’s
room, my bedroom, even in front of the bathroom mirror.
“Do you have your book?”
“No, it’s not out yet.”
“A copy of the last one you wrote?”
“Yes.”
“Take it and sit here, pretend to be reading.”
I obeyed in a daze. Tina grabbed a book, too, and assumed the same pose,
saying to Imma: Take a picture of me. This excited the photographer, she said:
Sit on the floor with the children. She took a lot of pictures, Tina and Imma
were happy. She exclaimed: Now let’s do one alone with your daughter. I tried
to pull Imma to me, but she said: No, the other one, she has a fantastic face. She
pushed Tina toward me, she took an infinite number of pictures, Imma became
upset.  Me,  too,  she  said.  I  opened  my  arms,  I  called  to  her:  Yes,  come  to
Mamma.
The morning flew by. The woman in the blue raincoat dragged us out of the
house, but was somewhat tense. She asked a couple of times: They won’t steal
my equipment? Then she got carried away, she wanted to photograph every
squalid corner of the neighborhood. She placed me on a broken-down bench,
against a flaking wall, next to the old urinal. I said to Imma and Tina: Stay here,
don’t move, because the cars are going by, I’m warning you. They held each
other by the hand, one fair and one dark, the same height, and waited.
Lila returned from work at dinnertime, and came up to get her daughter.
Tina didn’t wait for her to come in before she told her all about it.
“A beautiful lady came.”
“More beautiful than me?”
“Yes.”
“Even more beautiful than Aunt Lenuccia?”
“No.”
“So Aunt Lenuccia is the prettiest of all?”
“No, me.”
“You? What nonsense you talk.”
“It’s true, Mamma.”
“And what did this lady do?”
“Took photos.”
“Of whom?”
“Of me.”
“Only you?”
“Yes.”
“Liar. Imma, come here, tell me what you did.”
89.
I waited for Panorama to come out. I was pleased now, the publicity office
was  doing  a  good  job,  I  felt  proud  of  being  the  subject  of  an  entire
photographic feature. But a week passed, and the feature didn’t appear. Two
weeks  passed,  nothing.  It  was  the  end  of  March,  the  book  was  in  the
bookstores, and still nothing. I was absorbed in other things, an interview on
the radio, one in Il Mattino. At a certain point I had to go to Milan for the launch
of the book. I did it in the same bookstore as fifteen years earlier, introduced
by the same professor. Adele didn’t come, nor did Mariarosa, but the audience
was bigger than in the past. The professor talked about the book without much
warmth  but  positively,  and  some  members  of  the  audience—it  was  mostly
women—spoke  up  enthusiastically  about  the  complex  humanity  of  the
protagonist.  A  rite  that  I  knew  well  by  now.  I  left  the  next  morning  and
returned to Naples, exhausted.
I remember that I was heading home, dragging my suitcase, when a car
pulled  up  along  the  stradone.  At  the  wheel  was  Michele,  next  to  him  sat
Marcello. I remembered when the two Solaras had tried to pull me into their
car—they had done it with Ada, too—and Lila had defended me. I had on my
wrist, as I had then, my mother’s bracelet, and, though objects are impassive
by nature, I drew back with a start to protect it. But Marcello stared straight
ahead without greeting me, he didn’t even say in his usual good-humored tone:
Here’s the sister-in-law who writes novels. Michele spoke, he was furious:
“Lenù, what the fuck did you write in that book? Despicable things about the
place you were born? Despicable things about my family? Despicable things
about the people who watched you grow up and who admire you and love you?
Despicable things about this beautiful city of ours?”
He turned around and took from the backseat a copy of Panorama, fresh from
the printer, and held it out through the window.
“You like talking shit?”
I looked. The weekly was open to the page about me. There was a big color
photo that showed Tina and me sitting on the floor at my apartment. The
caption struck me immediately: Elena Greco with her daughter Tina. At first I
thought that the problem was the caption and I didn’t understand why Michele
was so angry. I said bewildered:
“They made a mistake.”
But he shouted out a sentence, even more incomprehensible:
“They aren’t the ones who made a mistake, it was you two.”
At that point Marcello interrupted, he said with irritation:
“Forget it, Michè, Lina manipulates her and she doesn’t even realize it.”
He took off, tires screeching, and left me on the sidewalk with the magazine
in my hand.
90.
I stood stock-still, my suitcase beside me. I read the article, four pages with
pictures of the ugliest places in the neighborhood: the only one with me was
the one with Tina, a beautiful picture in which the bleak background of the
apartment gave our two figures a particular refinement. The writer wasn’t
reviewing my book and didn’t speak of it as a novel, but used it to give an
account of what he called “the dominion of the Solara brothers,” a borderland
territory, perhaps tied to the new organized Camorra, perhaps not. Of Marcello
it  said  little,  alluding  mainly  to  Michele,  to  whom  it  attributed  initiative,
unscrupulousness,  a  tendency  to  jump  from  one  political  cart  to  the  next,
according to the logic of business. What business? Panorama made a list, mixing
the  legal  and  the  illegal:  the  bar-pastry  shop,  hides,  shoe  factories,  mini-
markets,  night  clubs,  loan  sharking,  cigarette  smuggling,  receiving  stolen
goods, drugs, infiltration of the post-earthquake construction sites.
I broke into a cold sweat.
What had I done, how could I have been so imprudent.
In Florence I had invented a plot, drawing on facts of my childhood and
adolescence  with  the  boldness  that  came  from  distance.  Naples,  seen  from
there, was almost a place of imagination, a city like the ones in films, which
although the streets and buildings are real serve only as a background for
crime stories or romances. Then, since I had moved and saw Lila every day, a
mania for reality had gripped me, and although I hadn’t named it I had told the
story of the neighborhood. But I must have overdone it, and the relationship
between  truth  and  fiction  must  have  gone  awry:  now  every  street,  every
building  had  become  recognizable,  and  maybe  even  the  people,  even  the
violent acts. The photographs were proof of what my pages really contained,
they identified the area conclusively, and the neighborhood ceased to be, as it
had always been for me while I was writing, an invention. The author of the
article told the history of the neighborhood, even mentioning the murders of
Don Achille Carracci and Manuela Solara. He went on at length about the latter,
hypothesizing that it had been either the visible point of a conflict between
Camorra  families  or  an  execution  at  the  hands  of  the  “dangerous  terrorist
Pasquale  Peluso,  born  and  raised  in  the  area,  former  bricklayer,  former
secretary of the local section of the Communist Party.” But I hadn’t written
anything  about  Pasquale,  I  hadn’t  written  anything  about  Don  Achille  or
Manuela. The Carraccis, the Solaras had been for me only outlines, voices that
had been able to enrich, with the cadence of dialect, gestures, at times violent
tonalities, a completely imagined scheme. I didn’t want to stick my nose in
their real business, what did “the dominion of the Solara brothers” have to do
with it.
I had written a novel.
91.
I went to Lila’s house in a state of great agitation, the children were with
her. You’re back already, said Elsa, who felt freer when I wasn’t there. And
Dede  greeted  me  distractedly,  murmuring  with  feigned  restraint:  Just  a
minute,  Mamma,  I’ll  finish  my  homework  and  then  hug  you.  The  only
enthusiastic one was Imma, who pressed her lips to my cheek and kissed me
for a long time, refusing to let go. Tina wanted to do the same. But I had other
things on my mind, and paid them almost no attention. I immediately showed
Lila Panorama. I told her about the Solaras, suppressing my anxiety. I said:
They’re angry. Lina read the article calmly and made a single comment: Nice
photos. I exclaimed: “I’ll send a letter, I’ll protest. Let them do a report on
Naples, let them do it on, I don’t know, the kidnapping of Cirillo, on Camorra
deaths, on what they want, but they shouldn’t use my book gratuitously.”
“And why?”
“Because it’s literature, I didn’t narrate real events.”
“I recall that you did.”
I looked at her uncertainly.
“What do you mean?”
“You didn’t use the names, but a lot of things were recognizable.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
“I told you I didn’t like the book. Things are told or not told: you remained in
the middle.”
“It was a novel.”
“Partly a novel, partly not.”
I  didn’t  answer,  my  anxiety  increased.  Now  I  didn’t  know  if  I  was  more
unhappy  about  the  Solaras’  reaction  or  because  she,  serenely,  had  just
repeated her negative judgment of years earlier. I looked at Dede and Elsa, who
had taken possession of the magazine, but almost without seeing them. Elsa
exclaimed: “Tina, come see, you’re in the newspaper.”
Tina approached and looked at herself, eyes wide with wonder and a pleased
smile on her face. Imma asked Elsa: “Where am I?”
“You’re  not  there  because  Tina  is  pretty  and  you’re  ugly,”  her  sister
answered.
Imma then turned to Dede to find out if it was true. And Dede, after reading
the Panorama caption aloud twice, tried to convince her that since her name
was Sarratore and not Airota, she wasn’t truly my daughter. I couldn’t take it
anymore, I was tired, upset, I cried: That’s enough, let’s go home. They all three
objected, supported by Tina and by Lila, who insisted that we stay for dinner.
I stayed. Lila tried to soothe me, she even tried to make me forget that she
had again been critical of my book. She started off in dialect and then began to
speak in the Italian she brought out on important occasions, which never failed
to surprise me. She cited the experience of the earthquake, for more than two
years she had done nothing except complain of how the city had deteriorated.
She said that since then she had been careful never to forget that we are very
crowded  beings,  full  of  physics,  astrophysics,  biology,  religion,  soul,
bourgeoisie,  proletariat,  capital,  work,  profit,  politics,  many  harmonious
phrases, many unharmonious, the chaos inside and the chaos outside. So calm
down, she said laughing, what do you expect the Solaras to be. Your novel is
done: you wrote it, you rewrote it, being here was evidently useful to you, to
make it truer, but now it’s out and you can’t take it back. The Solaras are
angry? So what. Michele threatens you? Who gives a damn. There could be
another  earthquake  at  any  moment,  even  stronger.  Or  the  whole  universe
could collapse. And then what is Michele Solara? Nothing. And Marcello is
nothing.  The  two  of  them  are  merely  flesh  that  spouts  out  threats  and
demands for money. She sighed. She said in a low voice: The Solaras will always
be dangerous beasts, Lenù, there’s nothing to be done; I thought I had tamed
one but his brother made him ferocious again. Did you see how many blows
Michele gave Alfonso? They’re blows he wanted to give me but he hasn’t got
the courage. And that rage at your book, at the article in Panorama, at the
photos, is all rage against me. So don’t give a shit, the way I don’t give a shit.
You put them in the newspaper and the Solaras can’t tolerate it, it’s bad for
business and for scams. To us, on the other hand, it’s a pleasure, no? What do
we have to worry about?
I  listened.  When  she  talked  like  that,  with  those  high-flown
pronouncements, the suspicion returned that she had continued to consume
books, the way she had as a girl, but that for incomprehensible reasons she
kept it hidden from me. In her house not a single volume was to be seen, apart
from the hypertechnical pamphlets that had to do with the work. She wanted
to present herself as an uneducated person, and yet suddenly here she was
talking about biology, psychology, about how complicated human beings are.
Why did she act like that with me? I didn’t know, but I needed support and I
trusted her just the same. In other words, Lila managed to soothe me. I reread
the article and I liked it. I examined the photographs: the neighborhood was
ugly but Tina and I were pretty. We began to cook, and the preparations helped
me reflect. I decided that the article, the photos, would be useful for the book
and that the text of Florence, filled out in Naples, in the apartment above hers,
really was improved. Yes, I said, let’s screw the Solaras. And I relaxed, I was
nice to the children again.
Before dinner, after who knows what councils, Imma came over to me, Tina
trailing  behind.  In  her  language  made  up  of  words  that  were  pronounced
clearly and words that were barely comprehensible she said: “Mamma, Tina
wants to know if your daughter is me or her.”
“And do you want to know?” I asked her.
Her eyes were shining: “Yes.”
Lila said:
“We are mammas of you both and we love you both.”
When Enzo returned from work he was excited about the photograph of his
daughter. The next day he bought two copies of Panorama and stuck up in his
office both the whole image and the image of his daughter alone. Naturally he
cut off the mistaken caption.
92.
Today, as I write, I’m embarrassed at the way fortune continued to favor me.
The book immediately aroused interest. Some were thrilled by the pleasure of
reading it. Some praised the skill with which the protagonist was developed.
Some talked about a brutal realism, some extolled my baroque imagination,
some  admired  a  female  narrative  that  was  gentle  and  embracing.  In  other
words there were many positive judgments, but often in sharp contrast to one
another, as if the reviewers hadn’t read the book that was in the bookstores
but, rather, each had evoked a fantasy book fabricated from his own biases. On
one  thing,  after  the  article  in  Panorama,  they  all  agreed:  the  novel  was
absolutely different from the usual kind of writing about Naples.
When my copies arrived from the publisher, I was so happy that I decided to
give one to Lila. I hadn’t given her my previous books, and I took it for granted
that, at least for the moment, she wouldn’t even look at it. But I felt close to
her, she was the only person I could truly rely on, and I wanted to show her my
gratitude. She didn’t react well. Obviously that day she had a lot to do, and was
involved in her usual aggressive way in the neighborhood conflicts over the
forthcoming elections on June 26th. Or maybe something had annoyed her, I
don’t know. The fact is that I gave her the book and she didn’t even look at it,
she said I shouldn’t waste my copies.
I was disappointed. Enzo saved me from embarrassment. Give it to me, he
said, I’ve never had a passion for reading, but I’ll save it for Tina, so when she
grows up she’ll read it. And he wanted me to write a dedication to the child. I
remember that I wrote with some uneasiness: For Tina, who will do better than
all of us. Then I read the dedication aloud and Lila exclaimed: It doesn’t take
much to do better than me, I hope she’ll do much more. Pointless words, with
no motivation: I had written better than all of us and she had reduced it to better
than me. Both Enzo and I dropped it. He put the book on a shelf among the
computer manuals and we talked about the invitations I was receiving, the
trips I would have to make.
93.
In general those moments of hostility were open, but sometimes they also
persisted behind an appearance of availability and affection. Lila, for example,
still  seemed  happy  to  take  care  of  my  daughters,  and  yet,  with  a  mere
inflection of her voice, she could make me feel indebted, as if she were saying:
What you are, what you become, depends on what I, sacrificing, allow you to
be, to become. If I perceived that tone I darkened and suggested getting a
babysitter. But both she and Enzo were almost offended, it shouldn’t even be
mentioned. One morning when I needed her help she alluded in irritation to
problems that were putting her under pressure and I said coldly that I could
find other solutions. She became aggressive: Did I tell you I can’t? If you need
me,  I’ll  arrange  it:  have  your  daughters  ever  complained,  have  I  neglected
them? So I convinced myself that she wanted only a sort of declaration of
indispensability  and  I  admitted  with  sincere  gratitude  that  my  public  life
would have been impossible if she had been less supportive. Then I gave in to
my commitments without any more qualms.
Thanks to the competence of the publicity office, I appeared in a different
newspaper every day, and a couple of times even on television. I was excited
and extremely tense, I liked the increasing attention but I was afraid of saying
the wrong thing. At the moments of greatest anxiety I didn’t know whom to
ask and I resorted to Lila for advice:
“If they ask me about the Solaras?”
“Say what you think.”
“And if the Solaras get angry?”
“At the moment you’re more dangerous for them than they are for you.”
“I’m worried, Michele seems crazier and crazier.”
“Books are written so their authors can be heard, not so that they remain
silent.”
In reality I always tried to be cautious. It was the middle of a heated electoral
campaign, and I was careful, in interviews, not to get mixed up in politics, not
to mention the Solaras, who—it was known—were involved in funneling votes
for the five governing parties. Instead I talked a lot about the conditions of life
in  the  neighborhood,  of  the  further  deterioration  after  the  earthquake,  of
poverty  and  illegal  trafficking,  of  institutional  complicity.  And  then—
depending  on  the  questions  and  the  whim  of  the  moment—I  talked  about
myself, about my education, about the effort I had had to make in order to
study, about misogyny at the Normale, about my mother, about my daughters,
about feminist thought. It was a complicated moment in the literary market;
writers  of  my  age,  hesitating  between  the  avant-garde  and  traditional
storytelling,  struggled  to  define  and  establish  themselves.  But  I  had  an
advantage.  My  first  book  had  come  out  at  the  end  of  the  sixties,  with  my
second I had demonstrated a solid education and a broad range of interests,
and  I  was  one  of  the  few  who  had  a  small  publication  history  and  even  a
following. So the telephone began to ring more and more often. But rarely, it
should  be  said,  did  the  journalists  want  opinions  or  comments  on  literary
questions; they asked me mainly for sociological reflections and statements
about the current state of Naples. I engaged in this willingly. And soon I began
to contribute to Il Mattino on an array of subjects, and I accepted a column in
We Women, I presented the book wherever I was invited, adapting it to the
requirements of the audience I found. I couldn’t believe what was happening to
me. The preceding books had done well but not with the same momentum. A
couple  of  well-known  writers  whom  I  had  never  had  a  chance  to  meet
telephoned me. A famous director wanted to meet me, he wanted to make my
novel into a film. Every day I learned that the book had been requested for
reading by this or that foreign publisher. I was more and more content.
But I got particular satisfaction from two unexpected phone calls. The first
was  from  Adele.  She  spoke  to  me  very  cordially,  she  asked  about  her
grandchildren, she said that she knew all about them from Pietro, that she had
seen pictures of them and they were beautiful. I listened to her, I confined
myself to a few polite remarks. About the book she said: I read it again, well
done, you improved it a lot. And as she said goodbye she made me promise that
if I came to present the book in Genoa I should let her know, I should bring the
children, leave them with her for a while. I promised, but I ruled out that I
would keep my promise.
A few days later Nino called. He said that my novel was fantastic (a quality of
writing unimaginable in Italy), he asked to see the three children. I invited him to
lunch.  He  devoted  himself  to  Dede,  Elsa,  and  Imma,  and  then  naturally  he
spoke a great deal about himself. He spent very little time in Naples now, he
was always in Rome, he worked a lot with my former father-in-law, he had
important responsibilities. He repeated: Things are going well, Italy is finally
setting out on the road to modernity. Then suddenly he exclaimed, fixing his
eyes on mine: Let’s get back together. I burst out laughing: When you want to
see Imma, call; but the two of us have nothing more to say to each other. It
seems to me that I conceived the child with a ghost, certainly you weren’t in
the bed. He went away sulkily and didn’t show up again. He forgot about us—
Dede, Elsa, Imma, and me—for a long period. He probably forgot about us as
soon as I closed the door behind him.
94.
At that point, what more did I want? My name, the name of a nobody, was
definitely becoming the name of a somebody. That was why Adele Airota had
telephoned me as if to apologize, that was why Nino Sarratore had tried to be
forgiven and to return to my bed, that was why I was invited everywhere. Of
course, it was difficult to separate from the children and stop, if just for a few
days, being their mother. But even that tug became habitual. The need to make
a good impression in public soon replaced the sense of guilt. My head became
crowded with countless things, Naples and the neighborhood lost substance.
Other landscapes imposed themselves, I went to beautiful cities I had never
seen before, I thought I would like to go and live in them. I met men who
attracted me, who made me feel important, who made me happy. A range of
alluring possibilities opened up before me in the space of a few hours. And the
chains  of  motherhood  weakened,  sometimes  I  forgot  to  call  Lila,  to  say
goodnight to the girls. Only when I noticed that I would have been capable of
living without them did I return to myself, did I feel remorse.
Then there was an especially bad moment. I left for a long promotional tour
in the south. I was to stay away for a week, but Imma didn’t feel well, she
looked depressed, she had a bad cold. It was my fault, I couldn’t be angry with
Lila: she was very attentive, but she had endless things to do and couldn’t keep
an eye on the children if they got sweaty when they ran around, and the drafts.
Before I left I asked the publicity office to get me the telephone numbers of the
hotels where I was to stay and I left them with Lila for any eventuality. If there
are problems, I insisted, telephone me and I’ll be right home.
I departed. At first I thought only of Imma and her illness, I called whenever
I could. Then I forgot about it. I arrived in a place, I was welcomed with great
courtesy, an intense program had been prepared for me, I tried to show that I
was up to it, I was celebrated at interminable dinners. Once I tried to call, but
the telephone rang unanswered, and I let it go; once Enzo answered and said in
his laconic way: Do what you have to do, don’t worry; once I talked to Dede,
who said, in an adult voice, We’re fine, Mamma, bye, have fun. But when I
returned I discovered that Imma had been in hospital for three days. She had
pneumonia, and had been admitted. Lila was with her, she had abandoned
every commitment, had abandoned even Tina, had stayed in the hospital with
my daughter. I was desperate, I protested that I had been kept in the dark. But
she wouldn’t give in, even when I returned, she continued to feel responsible
for the child. Go, she said, you’re always traveling, rest.
I was truly tired, but above all I was dazed. I regretted not having been with
the child, of having deprived her of my presence just when she needed me.
Because now I didn’t know anything about how much and in what way she had
suffered. Whereas Lila had in her head all the phases of my daughter’s illness,
her difficulty breathing, the suffering, the rush to the hospital. I looked at her,
there in the corridor of the hospital, and she seemed more worn-out than I
was. She had offered Imma the permanent and loving contact of her body. She
hadn’t been home for days, she had hardly slept, she had the blunted gaze of
exhaustion. I, however, in spite of myself, felt inside—and maybe appeared
outside—luminous.  Even  now  that  I  knew  about  my  daughter’s  illness,  I
couldn’t  get  rid  of  the  satisfaction  for  what  I  had  become,  the  pleasure  of
feeling free, moving all over Italy, the pleasure of disposing of myself as if I had
no past and everything were starting now.
As soon as the child was discharged, I confessed my state of mind to Lila. I
wanted to find an order in the confusion of guilt and pride that I felt inside, I
wanted to tell her how grateful I was but also hear from her in detail what
Imma—since I hadn’t been there to give it to her—had gotten from her. But Lila
replied almost with irritation: Lenù, forget it, it’s over, your daughter’s fine,
there are bigger problems now. I thought for a few seconds that she meant her
problems at work but it wasn’t that, the problems had to do with me. She had
found out, just before Imma’s illness, that a lawsuit was about to be brought
against me. The person who was bringing it was Carmen.
95.
I was frightened, and I felt distressed. Carmen? Carmen had done a thing like
that to me?
The thrilling phase of success ended at that moment. In a few seconds the
guilt at having neglected Imma was added to the fear that by legal means
everything would be taken away from me, joy, prestige, money. I was ashamed
of myself, of my aspirations. I said to Lila that I wanted to talk to Carmen right
away, she advised me against it. But I had the impression that she knew more
than what she had said and I went to look for Carmen anyway.
First I went to the gas pump, but she wasn’t there. Roberto was embarrassed
in my presence. He was silent about the lawsuit, he said that his wife had gone
with the children to Giugliano, to some relatives, and would be there for a
while. I left him standing there and went to their house to see if he had told me
the truth. But Carmen either really had gone to Giugliano or wouldn’t open the
door to me. It was very hot. I walked for a while to calm myself, then I looked
for Antonio, I was sure he would know something. I thought it would be hard
to track him down, he was always out. But his wife told me that he had gone to
the barber and I would find him there. I asked him if he had heard talk of legal
actions against me, and instead of answering he began to complain about the
school,  he  said  that  the  teachers  were  annoyed  with  his  children,  they
complained that they spoke in German or in dialect, but meanwhile they didn’t
teach them Italian. Then out of the blue he almost whispered: “Let me take this
moment to say goodbye.”
“Where are you going.”
“I’m going back to Germany.”
“When?”
“I don’t yet know.”
“Why are you saying goodbye now?”
“You’re never here, we hardly see each other.”
“It’s you who never come to see me.”
“You don’t come to see me, either.”
“Why are you going?”
“My family isn’t happy here.”
“Is it Michele who’s sending you away?”
“He commands and I obey.”
“So it’s he who doesn’t want you in the neighborhood anymore.”
He looked at his hands, he examined them carefully.
“Every so often my nervous breakdown returns,” he said, and he began to
talk to me about his mother, Melina, who wasn’t right in the head.
“You’ll leave her to Ada?”
“I’ll take her with me,” he muttered. “Ada already has too many troubles.
And I have the same constitution, I want to keep her in sight to see what I’m
going to become.”
“She’s always lived here, she’ll suffer in Germany.”
“One suffers everywhere. You want some advice?”
I understood from the way he looked at me that he had decided to get to the
point.
“Let’s hear it.”
“You get out of here, too.”
“Why?”
“Because Lina believes that the two of you are invincible but it’s not true.
And I can’t help you any longer.”
“Help us in what?”
He shook his head unhappily.
“The  Solaras  are  furious.  Did  you  see  how  people  voted  here  in  the
neighborhood?”
“No.”
“It turned out that they no longer control the votes they used to control.”
“So?”
“Lina has managed to shift a lot of them to the Communists.”
“And what do I have to do with it?”
“Marcello and Michele see Lina behind everything, especially behind you.
There is a lawsuit, and Carmen’s lawyers are their lawyers.”
96.
I went home, I didn’t look for Lila. I assumed that she knew all about the
elections, about the votes, about the Solaras, enraged, who were waiting in
ambush behind Carmen. She told me things a little at a time, for her own ends.
Instead I called the publishing house, I told the editor in chief about the lawsuit
and  what  Antonio  had  reported  to  me.  For  now  it’s  only  a  rumor,  I  said,
nothing certain, but I’m worried. He tried to reassure me, he promised that he
would ask the legal department to investigate and as soon as he found out
anything he would telephone me. He concluded: Why are you so agitated, this
is good for the book. Not for me, I thought, I’ve been wrong about everything, I
shouldn’t have returned here to live.
Days passed, I didn’t hear from the publisher, but the notification of the
lawsuit arrived at my house like a stab. I read it and was speechless. Carmen
demanded  that  the  editor  and  I  withdraw  the  book  from  circulation,  plus
enormous  damages  for  having  tarnished  the  memory  of  her  mother,
Giuseppina. I had never seen a document that summed up in itself, in the
letterhead,  in  the  quality  of  the  writing,  in  the  decorative  stamps  and
notarized seals, the power of the law. I discovered that what had never made
an impression on me as an adolescent, even as a young woman, now terrified
me. This time I hurried to see Lila. When I told her what it was about she
started teasing me: “You wanted the law, the law has arrived.”
“What should I do?”
“Make a scene.”
“What do you mean?”
“Tell the newspapers what’s happening to you.”
“You’re crazy. Antonio said that behind Carmen are the Solaras’ lawyers,
and don’t say you don’t know.”
“Of course I know.”
“Then why didn’t you tell me?”
“Because you see how nervous you are? But you don’t have to worry. You’re
afraid of the law and the Solaras are afraid of your book.”
“I’m afraid that with all the money they have they can ruin me.”
“But it’s precisely their money you have to go for. Write. The more you write
about their disgusting affairs the more you ruin their business.”
I was depressed. Lila thought this? This was her project? Only then did I
understand clearly that she ascribed to me the power that as children we had
ascribed to the author of Little Women. That was why she had wanted me to
return to the neighborhood at all costs? I left without saying anything. I went
home, I called the publisher again. I hoped that he was exerting himself in
some way, I wanted news that would calm me, but I didn’t reach him. The next
day he called me. He announced gaily that in the Corriere della Sera there was an
article by him—yes, by his hand—in which he gave an account of the lawsuit.
Go and buy it, he said, and let me know what you think.
97.
I  went  to  the  newsstand  more  anxious  than  ever.  There  again  was  the
photograph of me with Tina, this time in black-and-white. The lawsuit was
announced in the headline; it was considered an attempt to muzzle one of the
very few courageous writers et cetera, et cetera. The article didn’t name the
neighborhood, it didn’t allude to the Solaras. Skillfully, it set the episode within
a conflict that was taking place everywhere, “between the medieval remnants
that are keeping this country from modernizing and the unstoppable advance,
even in the South, of political and cultural renewal.” It was a short piece, but it
defended  effectively,  especially  in  the  conclusion,  the  rights  of  literature,
separating them from what were called “very sad local disputes.”
I was relieved, I had the impression of being well protected. I telephoned, I
praised the article, then I went to show the paper to Lila. I expected her to be
be excited. That was what it seemed to me she wanted: a deployment of the
power that she ascribed to me. Instead she said coolly:
“Why did you let this man write the article?”
“What’s wrong? The publisher is standing behind me, they’re attending to
this mess, it seems a good thing.”
“It’s just talk, Lenù, this guy is only interested in selling the book.”
“And isn’t that good?”
“It’s good, but you should have written the article.”
I became nervous, I couldn’t understand what she had in mind.
“Why?”
“Because  you’re  smart  and  you  know  the  situation  well.  You  remember
when you wrote the article against Bruno Soccavo?”
That reference, instead of pleasing me, upset me. Bruno was dead and I
didn’t like to remember what I had written. He wasn’t very bright, ending up in
the clutches of the Solaras and who knows how many others, given that they
had killed him. I wasn’t happy that I had been angry with him.
“Lila,”  I  said,  “the  article  wasn’t  against  Bruno,  it  was  an  article  about
factory work.”
“I know, and with this? You made them pay, and now that you’re an even
more important person you can do better. The Solaras shouldn’t hide behind
Carmen. You have to drag the Solaras out into the open, and they should no
longer command.”
I understood why she had disparaged the editor’s article. She didn’t care in
the least about freedom of expression and the battle between backwardness
and  modernization.  She  was  interested  only  in  the  sad  local  disputes.  She
wanted me, here, now, to contribute to the clash with real people, people we
had known since childhood, and what they were made of. I said:
“Lila, the Corriere doesn’t give a damn about Carmen, who sold herself, and
the Solaras, who bought her. To be in a big newspaper, an article has to have a
broad meaning, otherwise they won’t publish it.”
Her face fell.
“Carmen didn’t sell herself,” she said. “She’s still your friend and she has
brought the suit against you for one reason alone: they forced her.”
“I don’t understand, explain it.”
She smiled at me, sneering, she was really angry.
“I’m not explaining anything to you: you write the books, you’re the one
who has to explain. I know only that here we don’t have any publisher in Milan
to protect us, no one who puts big articles in the newspaper for us. We are only
a local matter and we fix things however we can: if you want to help us, good,
and if not we’ll do it alone.”
98.
I went back to Roberto and harassed him until he gave me the address of the
relatives in Giugliano, then I got in the car with Imma and left to look for
Carmen.
The heat was suffocating. I had trouble locating the place, the relatives lived
on the outskirts. At the door, a large woman answered who told me brusquely
that Carmen had returned to Naples. Hardly persuaded, I went off with Imma,
who, even though we had walked only a hundred meters, protested that she
was tired. But as soon as I turned the corner to go back to the car I ran into
Carmen, loaded with shopping bags. It was an instant, she saw me and burst
into tears. I hugged her, Imma wanted to hug her, too. Then we found a café
with a table in the shade and after ordering the child to play silently with her
dolls I got Carmen to explain the situation. She confirmed what Lila had told
me: she had been forced to bring a suit against me. And she also told me the
reason:  Marcello  had  made  her  believe  that  he  knew  where  Pasquale  was
hiding.
“Is it possible?”
“It’s possible.”
“And do you know where he’s hiding?”
She hesitated, she nodded.
“They said that they’ll kill him whenever they want to.”
I tried to soothe her. I told her that if the Solaras really knew where the
person they believed had killed their mother was they would have seized him
long ago.
“So you think they don’t know?”
“Not that they don’t know. But at this point for the good of your brother
there’s only one thing you can do.”
“What?”
I told her that if she wanted to save Pasquale she should turn him in to the
carabinieri.
The effect this produced on Carmen was not good. She stiffened, I struggled
to explain that it was the only way to protect him from the Solaras. But it was
useless, I realized that my solution sounded to her like the worst of betrayals,
something much more serious than her betrayal of me.
“This way you remain in their hands,” I said. “They asked you to bring a suit
against me, they can ask you any other thing.”
“I’m his sister,” she exclaimed.
“It’s not a question of a sister’s love,” I said. “A sister’s love in this case has
harmed me, certainly won’t save him, and risks ruining you, too.”
But there was no way to convince her, in fact the more we talked, the more
confused I got. Soon she began crying again: one moment she felt sorry for
what she had done to me and asked my pardon, the next she felt sorry for what
they could do to her brother and she despaired. I remembered how she had
been as a girl, at the time I would never have imagined that she was capable of
such stubborn loyalty. I left her because I wasn’t able to console her, because
Imma was all sweaty and I was afraid that she would get sick again, because it
became increasingly less clear what I expected from Carmen. Did I want her to
break off her long complicity with Pasquale? Why did I believe it was the right
thing? Did I want her to choose the state over her brother? Why? To take her
away from the Solaras and make her withdraw the suit? Did that count more
than her anguish? I said to her:
“Do what you think is best, and remember that anyway I’m not mad at you.”
But Carmen at that point had an unpredictable flash of anger in her eyes:
“And why should you be mad at me? What do you have to lose? You’re in the
newspapers,  you’re  getting  publicity,  you’ll  sell  more  books.  No,  Lenù,  you
shouldn’t say that, you advised me to give Pasquale up to the carabinieri, you
were wrong.”
I went away feeling bitter and already on the drive home I doubted that it
had been a good idea to want to see her. I imagined that she would now go to
the  Solaras  and  that  they  would  force  her,  after  the  editor’s  article  in  the
Corriere, to take other actions against me.
99.
For days I expected new disasters, but nothing happened. The article created
a certain sensation, the Neapolitan papers took it up and amplified it, I got
phone calls and letters of support. The weeks passed, and I became used to the
idea of being sued; I discovered that it had happened to many who did the
same work I did and had been much more at risk than I was. Daily life asserted
itself. For a while I avoided Lila, and I was especially careful not to let myself be
drawn into making wrong moves.
The book never stopped selling. In August I went on vacation to Santa Maria
di Castellabate; Lila and Enzo were also supposed to take a house at the sea, but
work prevailed and it seemed natural for them to give Tina to me. The only
pleasure, among the endless difficulties and tasks of that time (call this one,
shout at that one, settle a quarrel, do the shopping, the cooking), was seeing a
couple of readers sitting under their umbrella each with my book in their
hands.
In the fall things started off better. I won a fairly important prize that came
with  a  substantial  sum,  and  I  felt  smart,  skilled  in  public  relations,  with
increasingly satisfying financial prospects. But the joy, the astonishment of the
first weeks of success never returned. I felt the days as if the light had become
opaque, and I perceived around me a widespread malaise. For a while there
hadn’t been a night when Enzo didn’t raise his voice with Gennaro, something
that had been very rare before. When I stopped in at Basic Sight I found Lila
plotting with Alfonso, and if I tried to approach she signaled me to wait a
moment  with  a  distracted  gesture.  She  behaved  the  same  way  if  she  was
talking to Carmen, who had returned to the neighborhood, or to Antonio, who
for obscure reasons had put off his departure to some indeterminate time.
It was clear that things around Lila were getting worse, but she kept me out
of it and I preferred to stay out of it. Then there were two terrible moments,
one  after  the  other.  Lila  happened  to  discover  that  Gennaro’s  arms  were
covered  in  needle  marks.  I  heard  her  screaming  as  I  had  never  heard  her
scream before. She incited Enzo, she drove him to give her son a beating: they
were two strong men and they thrashed each other. The next day she threw
her brother Rino out of Basic Sight, even though Gennaro begged her not to
fire his uncle, he swore it wasn’t Rino who had started him on heroin. That
tragedy struck the girls deeply, especially Dede.
“Why does Aunt Lina treat her son like that?”
“Because he did something that he shouldn’t do.”
“He’s grown-up, he can do what he wants.”
“Not what can kill him.”
“Why? It’s his life, he has the right to do what he wants with it. You don’t
know what freedom is, and neither does Aunt Lina.”
She, Elsa, and even Imma were as if stunned by that outburst of cries and
curses that came from their beloved Aunt Lina. Gennaro was a prisoner in the
house and he shouted all day. His Uncle Rino disappeared from Basic Sight
after  breaking  a  very  expensive  machine,  and  his  curses  could  be  heard
throughout the neighborhood. Pinuccia came one evening with her children to
beg Lila to rehire her husband and brought her mother-in-law, too. Lila treated
both her mother and her sister-in-law rudely; the shouts and insults reached
my house clearly. You are delivering us hand and foot to the Solaras, Pinuccia
cried desperately. And Lila replied: you deserve it, I’m fucking sick and tired of
slaving for you without a drop of gratitude.
But that was petty compared to what happened a few weeks later. Things
had scarcely calmed down when Lila began to quarrel with Alfonso, who was
now  indispensable  to  the  operations  of  Basic  Sight  and  yet  had  become
increasingly unreliable. He missed important appointments, when he did make
them his attitude was an embarrassment, he was heavily made up, he spoke of
himself using the feminine. By now Lila had disappeared completely from his
face and, in spite of his efforts, he was regaining his masculinity. In his nose, in
his forehead, in his eyes something of his father, Don Achille, was appearing,
and he himself was disgusted by it. As a result he seemed continuously in flight
from his own body, which was putting on weight, and sometimes nothing was
heard of him for days. When he reappeared he almost always showed signs of
beatings. He went back to work but listlessly.
Then  one  day  he  disappeared  for  good.  Lila  and  Enzo  looked  for  him
everywhere, without success. His body was found days later on the beach at
Coroglio. He had been beaten to death somewhere else and then thrown into
the sea. At the time I couldn’t believe it. When I realized that it was all brutally
true I was seized by a grief that wouldn’t go away. I saw him again as he had
been  in  our  school  days,  gentle,  attentive  to  others,  beloved  by  Marisa,
tormented  by  Gino,  the  pharmacist’s  son.  Sometimes  I  even  recalled  him
behind the counter at the grocery during his summer vacations, when he was
obliged to do a job he detested. But I cut away the rest of his life, I knew little
about it, I felt it as confused. I couldn’t think of him as what he had become,
every recent encounter faded, I even forgot the period when he worked in the
shoe  store  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri.  Lila’s  fault,  I  thought  in  the  heat  of  the
moment:  with  her  mania  for  forcing  others  by  mixing  everything  up,  she
overwhelmed him. She had obscurely used him and then let him go.
But I changed my mind almost right away. Lila had learned the news several
hours earlier. She knew that Alfonso was dead, but she couldn’t get rid of the
rage she had felt for days and kept insisting, rudely, on his unreliability. Then,
right in the middle of a tirade like this, she collapsed on the floor of my house,
evidently because her grief was unbearable. From that moment it seemed to
me that she had loved him more than I did, even more than Marisa, and—as,
besides, Alfonso had often told me—had helped him as no one else had. In the
following hours she became listless, she stopped working, she lost interest in
Gennaro, she left Tina with me. Between her and Alfonso there must have been
a more complex relationship than I had imagined. She must have looked at him
as at a mirror and seen herself in him and had wanted to draw out of his body a
part  of  herself.  The  complete  opposite,  I  thought  uneasily,  of  what  I  had
narrated in my second book. That work of Lila’s must have pleased Alfonso
very much, he had offered himself to her like a living material and she had
molded him. Or at least so it seemed to me in the brief time in which I tried to
put  what  had  happened  in  order  and  calm  myself.  But,  in  the  end,  it  was
nothing but a vague impression of mine. In reality she never told me anything
about  their  bond,  not  then  or  later.  She  was  numbed  by  her  suffering,
harboring who knows what feelings, until the day of the funeral.
100.
There were very few of us at the funeral. None of Alfonso’s friends from
Piazza dei Martiri came, and his relatives didn’t come, either. I was struck
above all by the absence of Maria, his mother, even though none of his siblings
came, neither Pinuccia nor Stefano, nor was Marisa there with the children,
maybe his children, maybe not. Instead, surprisingly, the Solaras appeared.
Michele was grim, very thin, he was constantly looking around with the eyes of
a  madman.  Marcello,  on  the  other  hand,  seemed  contrite,  an  attitude  that
contrasted with the luxuriousness of every item of his clothing. They didn’t
limit themselves to the funeral service; they drove to the cemetery, and were
present at the burial. The whole time I wondered why they had showed up at
the service and I tried to catch Lila’s eye. She never looked at me, she focused
on them, she kept staring at them in a provocative manner. At the end, when
she saw that they were leaving, she grabbed my arm, she was furious.
“Come with me.”
“Where?”
“To talk to the two of them.”
“I have the children.”
“Enzo will take care of them.”
I hesitated, I tried to resist, I said: “Forget it.”
“Then I’ll go by myself.”
I grumbled, it had always been like that: if I didn’t agree to go with her she
abandoned me. I nodded to Enzo to watch the girls—he seemed not to have
noticed the Solaras—and in the same spirit with which I had followed her up
the stairs to Don Achille’s house or in the stone-throwing battles with the boys,
I followed her through the geometry of whitish buildings, packed with burial
niches.
Lila ignored Marcello, she stood in front of Michele: “Why did you come? Do
you feel some remorse?”
“Don’t bother me, Lina.”
“You two are finished, you’ll have to leave the neighborhood.”
“It’s better if you go, while you still have time.”
“Are you threatening me?”
“Yes.”
“Don’t  you  dare  touch  Gennaro,  and  don’t  touch  Enzo.  Michè,  do  you
understand me? Remember that I know enough to ruin you, you and that other
beast.”
“You don’t know anything, you have nothing in hand, and above all you’ve
understood nothing. Is it possible that you can be so intelligent and you still
don’t know that by now I don’t give a fuck about you?”
Marcello pulled him by the arm, he said in dialect: “Let’s go, Michè, we’re
wasting time here.”
Michele freed his arm forcefully, he turned to Lila: “You think you scare me
because Lenuccia is always in the newspapers? Is that what you think? That I’m
afraid of someone who writes novels? But this here is no one. You, however,
you are someone, even your shadow is better than any flesh-and-blood person.
But you would never understand, so much the worse for you. I’ll take away
everything you have.”
He said that last sentence as if he were suddenly sick to his stomach, and
then, as if reacting to the physical pain, before his brother could stop him he
punched Lila violently in the face, knocking her to the ground.
101.
I was paralyzed by that utterly unpredictable gesture. Not even Lila could
have imagined it, we were now so used to the idea that Michele not only would
never touch her but would kill anyone who did. I was unable to scream, not
even a choked sound came out of me.
Marcello dragged his brother away, but as he pulled and pushed him, as Lila
vomited in words dialect and blood (I’ll kill you, by God, you are both dead already),
he said to me with affectionate sarcasm: Put this in your next novel, Lenù, and
tell  Lina,  if  she  doesn’t  understand  yet,  that  my  brother  and  I  have  truly
stopped loving her.
It  was  hard  to  convince  Enzo  that  Lila’s  swollen  face  was  due  to  the
disastrous fall that, as we told him, had followed a sudden fainting fit. In fact
I’m almost certain that he wasn’t convinced at all, first because my version—
agitated as I was—must have seemed anything but plausible, second because
Lila didn’t even make an effort to be persuasive. But when Enzo tried to object
she  said  sharply  that  it  was  true,  and  he  stopped  discussing  it.  Their
relationship was based on the idea that even an open lie from Lila was the only
truth that could be uttered.
I  went  home  with  my  daughters.  Dede  was  frightened,  Elsa  incredulous,
Imma asked questions like: Is there blood in a nose? I was disoriented, I was
furious. Every so often I went down to see how Lila felt and to try and take Tina
with me, but the child was alarmed by her mother’s state and eager to help
her. For both reasons she wouldn’t leave her, even for a moment: she delicately
spread an ointment, placed metal objects on her mother’s forehead to cool it
and make the headache go away. When I brought my daughters down as a lure
to draw Tina up to my place, I merely made things more complicated. Imma
tried  every  way  she  could  to  intervene  in  the  treatment  game,  but  Tina
wouldn’t  yield  at  all  and  shrieked  desperately  even  when  Dede  and  Elsa
attempted  to  take  away  her  authority.  The  sick  mamma  was  hers  and  she
didn’t  want  to  give  her  up  to  anyone.  Finally  Lila  sent  everyone  away,
including me, and with such energy that it seemed to me she was already
better.
She  recovered  quickly,  in  fact.  Not  me.  My  fury  first  became  rage,  then
changed  into  contempt  for  myself.  I  couldn’t  forgive  myself  for  remaining
paralyzed in the face of violence. I said to myself: What have you become; why
did you come back here to live, if you weren’t capable of reacting against those
two shits; you’re too well-meaning, you want to play the democratic lady who
mixes with the working class, you like to say to the newspapers: I live where I
was born, I don’t want to lose touch with my reality; but you’re ridiculous, you
lost touch long ago, you faint at the stink of filth, of vomit, of blood. I had
thoughts like that and meanwhile images came to my mind in which I let loose
mercilessly  against  Michele.  I  hit  him,  scratched  him,  bit  him,  my  heart
pounding. Then the desire for violence died down and I said to myself: Lila is
right, one writes not so much to write, one writes to inflict pain on those who
wish to inflict pain. The pain of words against the pain of kicks and punches
and the instruments of death. Not much, but enough. Of course, she still had in
mind our dreams of childhood. She thought that if you gained fame, money,
and  power  through  writing,  you  became  a  person  whose  sentences  were
thunderbolts. Whereas I had long known that everything was more mediocre.
A book, an article, could make noise, but ancient warriors before the battle also
made  noise,  and  if  it  wasn’t  accompanied  by  real  force  and  immeasurable
violence it was only theater. Yet I wished to redeem myself, the noise could do
some damage. One morning I went downstairs, I asked her: What do you know
that frightens the Solaras.
She looked at me with curiosity, she circled around reluctantly for a while,
she answered: When I worked for Michele I saw a lot of documents, I studied
them, some stuff he gave me himself. Her face was livid, she made a pained
grimace, she added, in the crudest dialect: If a man wants pussy and he wants it
so much that he can’t even say I want it, even if you order him to stick his prick
in boiling oil he does it. Then she held her head in her hands, she shook it hard
as if it were a tin cup with dice in it, and I realized that she, too, at that
moment  despised  herself.  She  didn’t  like  the  way  she  was  forced  to  treat
Gennaro, the way she had insulted Alfonso, the way she had thrown out her
brother. She didn’t like a single one of the very vulgar words that were coming
out of her now. She couldn’t bear herself, she couldn’t bear anything. But at a
certain point she must have felt that we were in the same mood and she asked
me:
“If I give you things to write you’ll write them?”
“Yes.”
“And then what you write you’ll get printed?”
“Maybe, I don’t know.”
“What does it depend on?”
“I have to be sure that it will do damage to the Solaras and not to me and my
daughters.”
She looked at me, unable to make up her mind. Then she said: Take Tina for
ten minutes, and she left. She returned half an hour later with a floral-print
bag full of documents.
We sat down at the kitchen table, while Tina and Imma chattered softly,
moving dolls, horses, and carriages around the floor. Lila took out a lot of
papers, her notes, also two notebooks with stained red covers. I immediately
leafed  through  these  with  interest:  graph-paper  pages  written  in  the
calligraphy of the old elementary schools—account books, minutely annotated
in a language full of grammatical mistakes and initialed on every page “M.S.” I
understood that they were part of what the neighborhood had always called
Manuela Solara’s red book. How the expression “red book” had echoed during
our  childhood  and  adolescence:  evocative  yet  threatening—or  perhaps
evocative precisely because threatening. But whatever other word one might
use in speaking of it—“register,” for example—and no matter if the color was
altered, Manuela Solara’s book excited us like a secret document at the center
of  bloody  adventures.  Here  it  was,  instead.  It  was  a  collection  of  school
notebooks like the two I had before me: very ordinary dirty notebooks with the
lower right edge raised like a wave. I realized in a flash that the memory was
already literature and that perhaps Lila was right: my book—even though it
was having so much success—really was bad, and this was because it was well
organized, because it was written with obsessive care, because I hadn’t been
able  to  imitate  the  disjointed,  unaesthetic,  illogical,  shapeless  banality  of
things.
While the children played—if they merely hinted at a quarrel we let out
nervous cries to quiet them—Lila placed before my eyes all the material in her
possession, and explained the meaning of it. We organized and summarized. It
was a long time since we had undertaken something together. She seemed
pleased, I understood that this was what she wanted and expected from me. At
the end of the day she disappeared again with her bag and I returned to my
apartment to study the notes. Then, in the following days, she wanted us to
meet at Basic Sight. We locked ourselves in her office and sat at the computer,
a kind of television with a keyboard, very different from what she had showed
me and the children some time before. She pressed the power button, she slid
dark rectangles into gray blocks. I waited, bewildered. On the screen luminous
tremors appeared. Lila began to type on the keyboard, I was speechless. It was
in no way comparable to a typewriter, even an electric one. With her fingertips
she caressed gray keys, and the writing appeared silently on the screen, green
like newly sprouted grass. What was in her head, attached to who knows what
cortex of the brain, seemed to pour out miraculously and fix itself on the void
of the screen. It was power that, although passing for act, remained power, an
electrochemical stimulus that was instantly transformed into light. It seemed
to me like the writing of God as it must have been on Sinai at the time of the
Commandments, impalpable and tremendous, but with a concrete effect of
purity. Magnificent, I said. I’ll teach you, she said. And she taught me, and
dazzling,  hypnotic  segments  began  to  lengthen,  sentences  that  I  said,
sentences that she said, our volatile discussions were imprinted on the dark
well of the screen like wakes without foam. Lila wrote, I would reconsider.
Then with one key she erased, with others she made an entire block of light
disappear, and made it reappear higher up or lower down in a second. But
right afterward it was Lila who changed her mind, and everything was altered
again, in a flash: ghostly moves, what’s here now is no longer here or is there.
And no need for pen, pencil, no need to change the paper, put another sheet in
the roller. The page is the screen, unique, no trace of a second thought, it
always  seems  the  same.  And  the  writing  is  incorruptible,  the  lines  are  all
perfectly straight, they emit a sense of cleanliness even now that we are adding
the filthy acts of the Solaras to the filthy acts of half of Campania.
We worked for days. The text descended from Heaven to earth through the
noise of the printer, materialized in black dots laid on paper. Lila found it
inadequate, we returned to pens, we labored to correct it. She was irritable:
from me she expected more, she thought I could respond to all her questions,
she got angry because she was convinced that I was a well of knowledge, while
at every line she discovered that I didn’t know the local geography, the tiny
details  of  bureaucracies,  how  the  communal  councils  functioned,  the
hierarchies  of  a  bank,  the  crimes  and  the  punishments.  And  yet,
contradictorily, I hadn’t felt her to be so proud of me and of our friendship in a
long time. We have to destroy them, Lenù, and if this isn’t enough I’ll murder them.
Our heads collided—for the last time, now that I think of it—one against the
other, and merged until they were one. Finally we had to resign ourselves and
admit that it was finished, and the dull period of what’s done is done began.
She printed it yet again, I put our pages in an envelope, and sent it to the
publishing house and asked the editor to show it to the lawyers. I need to know
—I explained on the telephone—if this stuff was sufficient to send the Solaras
to jail.
102.
A week passed, two weeks. The editor telephoned one morning and was
lavish in his praise.
“You’re in a splendid period,” he said.
“I worked with a friend of mine.”
“It shows your hand at its best, it’s an extraordinary text. Do me a favor:
show  these  pages  to  Professor  Sarratore,  so  he  sees  how  anything  can  be
transformed into passionate reading.”
“I don’t see Nino anymore.”
“Maybe that’s why you’re in such good shape.”
I didn’t laugh, I needed to know urgently what the lawyers had said. The
answer disappointed me. There’s not enough material, the editor said, for even
a day in jail. You can take some satisfaction, but these Solaras of yours aren’t
going to prison, especially if, as you recount, they’re rooted in local politics and
have money to buy whoever they want. I felt weak, my legs went limp, I lost
conviction,  I  thought:  Lila  will  be  furious.  I  said,  depressed:  They’re  much
worse than I’ve described. The editor perceived my disappointment, he tried to
encourage me, he went back to praising the passion I had put into the pages.
But the conclusion remained the same: with this you won’t ruin them. Then, to
my surprise, he insisted that I not put aside the text but publish it. I’ll call
L’Espresso, he suggested, if you come out with a piece like this right now, it’ll be
an important move for yourself, for your audience, for everyone, you’ll show
that the Italy we live in is much worse than the one we talk about. And he
asked permission to submit the pages to the lawyers again to find out what
legal risks I would run, what I would have to take out and what I could keep. I
thought of how easy everything had been when it was a matter of scaring
Bruno Soccavo, and I refused firmly. I said, I’ll end up being sued again, I’d find
myself in trouble for no reason, and I would be forced—something I don’t want
to do, for the sake of my children—to think that the laws work for those who
fear them, not for those who violate them.
I waited a while, then I gathered my strength and told Lila everything, word
for word. She stayed calm, she turned on the computer, she scanned the text,
but  I  don’t  think  she  reread  it,  she  stared  at  the  screen  and  meanwhile
reflected. Then she asked me in a hostile tone: “Do you trust this editor?”
“Yes, he’s a smart person.”
“Then why don’t you want to publish the article?”
“What would be the point?”
“To clarify.”
“It’s already clear.”
“To whom? To you, to me, to the editor?”
She shook her head, displeased, and said coldly that she had to work.
I said: “Wait.”
“I’m in a hurry. Without Alfonso work’s gotten complicated. Go on, please,
go.”
“Why are you angry at me?”
“Go.”
We didn’t see each other for a while. In the morning she sent Tina up to me,
in the evening either Enzo came to get her or she shouted from the landing:
Tina,  come  to  Mamma.  A  couple  of  weeks  passed,  I  think,  then  the  editor
telephoned me in a very cheerful mood.
“Good for you, I’m glad you made up your mind.”
I didn’t understand and he explained to me that his friend at L’Espresso had
called, he urgently needed my address. From him he had learned that the text
on the Solaras would come out in that week’s issue, with some cuts. You could
have told me, he said, that you changed your mind.
I was in a cold sweat, I didn’t know what to say, I pretended nothing was
wrong. But it took me a moment to realize that Lila had sent our pages to the
weekly. I hurried to her to protest, I was indignant, but I found her especially
affectionate and above all happy.
“Since you couldn’t make up your mind, I did.”
“I had decided not to publish it.”
“Not me.”
“You sign it alone, then.”
“What do you mean? You’re the writer.”
It was impossible to communicate to her my disapproval and my anguish,
every  critical  sentence  of  mine  was  blunted  against  her  good  humor.  The
article, six dense pages, was given great prominence, and naturally it had a
single byline, mine.
When I saw that, we quarreled. I said to her angrily: “I don’t understand why
you behave like that.”
“I understand,” she said.
Her face still bore the marks of Michele’s fist, but certainly it hadn’t been
fear that kept her from putting her name to it. She was terrified by something
else and I knew it, she didn’t give a damn about the Solaras. But I felt so
resentful  that  I  threw  it  in  her  face  just  the  same—You  removed  your  name
because you like to stay hidden, because it’s convenient to throw stones and hide your
hand, I’m tired of your plots—and she began to laugh, it seemed to her a senseless
accusation. I don’t like that you think that, she said. She became sullen, she
muttered that she had sent the article to L’Espresso with only my name on it
because hers didn’t count, because I was the one who had studied, because I
was famous, because now I could give anyone a beating without fear. In those
words I found the confirmation that she ingenuously overestimated my role,
and  I  told  her  so.  But  she  was  annoyed,  she  answered  that  it  was  I  who
underrated myself, so she wanted me to take on more and better, to have even
greater success, all she wanted was for my merits to be recognized. You’ll see,
she exclaimed, what will happen to the Solaras.
I went home depressed. I couldn’t drive out the suspicion that she was using
me, just as Marcello had said. She had sent me out to risk everything and
counted on that bit of fame I had to win her war, to complete her revenge, to
silence all her feelings of guilt.
103.
In reality, having my name on that article was a further step up for me. As a
result of its wide circulation, many of my fragments were connected. I proved
that not only did I have a vocation as a fiction writer but, as in the past I had
been  involved  in  the  union  struggles,  as  I  had  engaged  in  criticizing  the
condition of women, so I fought against the degradation of my city. The small
audience I had won in the late sixties merged with the one that, amid ups and
downs, I had cultivated in the seventies and the new, larger one of now. That
helped  the  first  two  books,  which  were  reprinted,  and  the  third,  which
continued to sell well, while the idea of making a film from it became more
concrete.
Naturally  the  article  caused  a  lot  of  bother.  I  was  summoned  by  the
carabinieri. I was bugged by the financial police. I was vilified by local papers
on the right with labels like divorcée, feminist, Communist, supporter of terrorists. I
received anonymous phone calls that threatened me and my daughters in a
dialect full of obscenities. But, although I lived in anxiety—a state of anxiety
now seemed to me inherent to writing—I was in the end not as agitated as at
the time of the article in Panorama and Carmen’s lawsuit. It was my job, I was
learning  to  do  it  better  and  better.  And  then  I  felt  protected  by  the  legal
support of the publisher, by the success I had in newspapers on the left, by the
increasingly well attended public appearances, and by the idea that I was right.
But, if I have to be honest, it wasn’t only that. I calmed down mainly when it
became  evident  that  the  Solaras  would  do  absolutely  nothing  to  me.  My
visibility drove them to be as invisible as possible. Marcello and Michele not
only didn’t bring a second lawsuit but were completely silent, the whole time,
and  even  when  I  encountered  them  before  law-enforcement  officers,  both
confined  themselves  to  cold  but  respectful  greetings.  Thus  the  waters
subsided.  The  only  concrete  thing  that  happened  was  that  various
investigations were opened, along with an equal number of files. But, as the
lawyers of the publishing house had predicted, the first soon came to a halt,
the second ended—I imagine—under thousands of other files, and the Solaras
remained free. The only harm the article caused was of an emotional nature:
my sister, my nephew Silvio, even my father—not in words but in deeds—cut
me out of their lives. Only Marcello continued to be polite. One afternoon I met
him along the stradone, and I looked away. But he stopped in front of me, he
said: Lenù, I know that if you could you wouldn’t have done it, I’m not angry
with you, it’s not your fault. So remember that my house is always open. I
replied: Elisa hung up on me just yesterday. He smiled: Your sister is the boss,
what can I do?
104.
But  the  outcome,  which  was  in  essence  conciliatory,  depressed  Lila.  She
didn’t  hide  her  disappointment  and  yet  she  didn’t  put  it  into  words.  She
carried on, pretending that nothing was wrong: she dropped off Tina at my
house and shut herself in the office. But sometimes she stayed in bed all day;
she said her head was bursting, and she dozed.
I was careful not to remind her that the decision to publish our pages had
been hers. I didn’t say: I warned you that the Solaras would come out of it
unharmed, the publisher told me, now it’s pointless for you to suffer over it.
But  stamped  on  her  face  was  also  regret  that  she  had  been  wrong  in  her
assessment. In those weeks she felt humiliated at having always ascribed a
power  to  things  that  in  the  current  hierarchies  were  insignificant:  the
alphabet, writing, books. Only then—I think today—did she, who seemed so
disillusioned, so adult, come to the end of her childhood.
She stopped helping me. More and more often she gave me charge of her
daughter and sometimes, though rarely, even of Gennaro, who was forced to
hang around my house. Yet my life had become increasingly busy and I didn’t
know how to manage. One morning when I asked her about the children she
answered in annoyance: Call my mother, get her to help you. It was a novelty, I
withdrew in embarrassment, I obeyed. So it was that Nunzia arrived at my
house, much aged, submissive, uneasy, but efficient as in the days when she
took care of the house in Ischia.
My older daughters immediately treated her with disdain, especially Dede,
who was going through puberty and had lost any sense of tact. Her face was
inflamed, her body was swelling, becoming shapeless, driving out, day by day,
the image she was used to, and she felt ugly, she became mean. We began to
bicker:
“Why do we have to stay with that old lady? It’s disgusting what she cooks,
you should cook.”
“Stop it.”
“She spits when she talks, did you see she doesn’t have any teeth?”
“I don’t want to hear another word, that’s enough.”
“We already have to live in this toilet, now we have to have that person in
the house? I don’t want her to sleep here when you’re not here.”
“Dede, I said that’s enough.”
Elsa was no better, but in her own way: she remained serious, assuming a
tone that seemed to support me and yet was duplicitous.
“I like her, Mamma, you were right to have her come. She smells nice, just
like a corpse.”
“Now I’ll slap you. You know she can hear you?”
The only one who was immediately fond of Lila’s mother was Imma: she was
Tina’s slave and so she imitated her in everything, even in her attachments.
The two of them followed Nunzia around as she worked in the apartment; they
called  her  grandma.  But  Grandma  was  brusque,  especially  with  Imma.  She
caressed her real grandchild, occasionally softening at her chatter and her
affection, while she worked in silence when her pretend grandchild looked for
attention. Meanwhile—I discovered—something was bothering her. At the end
of the first week she said, looking down: Lenù, we haven’t talked about how
much you’ll give me. I felt hurt: I had stupidly thought that she came because
her daughter had asked her to; if I had known I had to pay I would have chosen
a young person, whom my daughters would like and from whom I could have
demanded what I needed. But I contained myself, we talked about money and
fixed on an amount. Only then Nunzia cheered up a little. At the end of the
negotiation she felt the need to justify herself: My husband is sick, she said, he
no longer works, and Lina is crazy, she fired Rino, we don’t have a cent. I
muttered that I understood, I told her to be nicer to Imma. She obeyed. From
then on, although she always favored Tina, she made an effort to be kind to my
daughter.
Toward Lila, however, her attitude didn’t change. Neither when she arrived
nor when she left did Nunzia ever feel the need to stop by at her daughter’s,
although Lila had gotten the job for her. If they met on the stairs they didn’t
even greet each other. She was an old woman who had lost her former wary
friendliness.  But  Lila,  too,  it  must  be  said,  was  intractable,  and  visibly
worsening.
105.
With me she was always spiteful, for no reason. It especially irritated me
that she acted as if everything that happened to my daughters escaped me.
“Dede got the curse.”
“Did she tell you?”
“Yes, you weren’t here.”
“Did you use that expression with her?”
“What word should I have used?”
“Something less vulgar.”
“You know how your daughters speak to each other? And have you ever
heard the things they say about my mother?”
I didn’t like that tone. She, who in the past had appeared so fond of Dede,
Elsa, and Imma, seemed determined to disparage them to me, and she took
every opportunity to show me that, because I was always traveling around
Italy, I neglected them, with serious consequences for their upbringing. I was
especially upset when she began accusing me of not seeing Imma’s problems.
“What’s wrong,” I asked her.
“She has a tic in her eye.”
“Not very often.”
“I’ve seen it a lot.”
“What do you think it means?”
“I don’t know. I only know that she feels fatherless and isn’t even sure she
has a mother.”
I  tried  to  ignore  her  but  it  was  difficult.  Imma,  as  I’ve  said,  had  always
worried me a little, and even when she stood up well to Tina’s vivacity she still
seemed to lack something. Also, some time earlier I had recognized in her
features of mine that I didn’t like. She was submissive, she gave in immediately
out of fear of not being liked, it depressed her that she had given in. I would
have  preferred  her  to  inherit  Nino’s  bold  capacity  for  seduction,  his
thoughtless vitality, but she wasn’t like that. Imma was unhappily compliant,
she wanted everything and pretended to want nothing. Children, I said, are the
product of chance, she’s got nothing of her father. Lila didn’t agree; she was
always finding ways of alluding to the child’s resemblance to Nino, but she
didn’t see it as positive, she spoke as if it were a congenital defect. And then
she kept repeating: I’m telling you these things because I love them and I’m
worried.
I  tried  to  explain  to  myself  her  sudden  persecution  of  my  daughters.  I
thought that, since I had disappointed her, she was withdrawing from me by
separating first of all from them. I thought that since my book was increasingly
successful, which sanctioned my autonomy from her and from her judgment,
she was trying to belittle me by belittling my children and my capacity to be a
good  mother.  But  neither  of  those  hypotheses  soothed  me  and  a  third
advanced: Lila saw what I, as a mother, didn’t know how or didn’t want to see,
and since she appeared critical of Imma in particular, I had better find out if
her comments had any foundation.
So  I  began  to  observe  the  child  and  was  soon  convinced  that  she  really
suffered.  She  was  the  slave  of  Tina’s  joyful  expansiveness,  of  her  elevated
capacity  for  verbalization,  of  the  way  she  aroused  tenderness,  admiration,
affection in everyone, especially me. Although my daughter was pretty, and
intelligent, beside Tina she turned dull, her virtues vanished, and she felt this
deeply. One day I witnessed an exchange between them, in a good Italian,
Tina’s pronunciation very precise, Imma’s still missing some syllables. They
were coloring in the outlines of animals and Tina had decided to use green for
a rhinoceros, while Imma added colors randomly for a cat. Tina said: “Make it
gray or black.”
“You mustn’t give me orders about the color.”
“It’s not an order, it’s a suggestion.”
Imma looked at her in alarm. She didn’t know the difference between an
order  and  a  suggestion.  She  said:  “I  don’t  want  to  follow  the  suggestion,
either.”
“Then don’t.”
Imma’s lower lip trembled.
“All right,” she said, “I’ll do it but I don’t like it.”
I tried to be more attentive to her. To begin with, I stopped getting excited
about everything Tina did, I reinforced Imma’s skills, I praised her for every
little thing. But I soon realized it wasn’t enough. The two little girls loved each
other. Dealing with each other helped them grow, some extra artificial praise
was of no help in keeping Imma, looking at her reflection in Tina, from seeing
something that wounded her and that her friend was certainly not the cause
of.
At that point I began to turn over Lila’s words: she’s fatherless and isn’t even
sure she has a mother. I remembered the mistake in the Panorama caption. That
caption, buttressed by Dede and Elsa’s mean jokes (You don’t belong to this family:
your name is Sarratore, not Airota), must have done its damage. But was that
really the core of the problem? I ruled it out. Her father’s absence seemed to
me something more serious and I was sure that her suffering came from that.
Once  I  had  started  down  this  road  I  began  to  notice  how  Imma  sought
Pietro’s  attention.  When  he  called  his  daughters,  she  sat  in  a  corner  and
listened to the conversation. If the sisters had a good time she pretended to be
having fun, too, and when the conversation ended and they said goodbye to
their father in turn, Imma shouted: Bye. Often Pietro heard her and said to
Dede: Give me Imma so I can say hello. But in those cases either she became
shy and ran away or took the receiver and remained mute. She behaved the
same way when he came to Naples. Pietro never forgot to bring her a little
present, and Imma hovered near him, played at being his daughter, was happy
if he said something nice or picked her up. Once when my ex-husband came to
get Dede and Elsa, the child’s sadness must have seemed especially obvious,
and as he left he said: Cuddle her, she’s sorry that her sisters are leaving and
she has to stay behind.
That observation increased my anxieties, I said to myself that I had to do
something, I thought of talking to Enzo and asking him to be more present in
Imma’s life. But he was already very attentive. If he carried his daughter on his
shoulders, after a while he put her down, picked up my daughter, and put her
up there; if he got Tina a toy, he got an identical one for her; if he was pleased
almost to the point of being moved at the intelligent questions his child asked,
he managed to remember to show enthusiasm for the somewhat more prosaic
questions  of  my  child.  But  I  spoke  to  him  anyway,  and  sometimes  Enzo
admonished Tina, if she occupied the stage and didn’t leave room for Imma. I
didn’t like that, it wasn’t the child’s fault. In those cases Tina was as if stunned,
the  lid  that  was  suddenly  lowered  on  her  vivacity  seemed  an  undeserved
punishment. She didn’t understand why the spell was broken, she struggled to
regain her father’s favor. At that point I would pull her to me, play with her.
In other words things were not going well. One morning I was in the office
with  Lila,  I  wanted  her  to  teach  me  to  write  on  the  computer.  Imma  was
playing with Tina under the desk and Tina was sketching in words imaginary
places  and  characters  with  her  usual  brilliance.  Monstrous  creatures  were
pursuing  their  dolls,  courageous  princes  were  about  to  rescue  them.  But  I
heard my daughter exclaim with sudden rage: “Not me.”
“Not you?”
“I won’t rescue myself.”
“You don’t have to rescue yourself, the prince rescues you.”
“I don’t have one.”
“Then mine will rescue you.”
“I said no.”
The  sudden  leap  with  which  Imma  had  gone  from  her  doll  to  herself
wounded me, even though Tina tried to keep her in the game. Because I was
distracted,  Lila  became  irritated,  she  said:  “Girls,  either  talk  quietly  or  go
outside and play.”
106.
That day I wrote a long letter to Nino. I enumerated the problems that I
thought were complicating our daughter’s life: her sisters had a father who
was attentive to them, she didn’t; her playmate, Lila’s daughter, had a very
devoted father and she didn’t; because of my work I was always traveling and
often had to leave her. In other words, Imma was in danger of growing up
feeling that she was continually at a disadvantage. I sent the letter and waited
for him  to  respond.  He  didn’t  and  so  I  decided  to  call  his  house. Eleonora
answered.
“He’s not here,” she said listlessly. “He’s in Rome.”
“Would you please tell him that my daughter needs him?”
Her voice caught in her throat. Then she composed herself: “Mine haven’t
seen their father, either, for at least six months.”
“Has he left you?”
“No, he never leaves anyone. Either you have the strength to leave him
yourself—and  in  this  you  were  smart,  I  admire  you—or  he  goes,  comes,
disappears, reappears, as it suits him.”
“Will you tell him I called, and if he won’t see the child I’ll track him down,
and take her to him wherever he is?”
I hung up.
It was a while before Nino made up his mind to call, but in the end he did. As
usual  he  acted  as  if  we  had  seen  each  other  a  few  hours  earlier.  He  was
energetic, cheerful, full of compliments. I cut him off, I asked: “Did you get my
letter?”
“Yes.”
“Then why didn’t you answer?”
“I’ve got no time.”
“Find the time, as soon as possible, Imma’s not well.”
He  said  reluctantly  that  he  would  return  to  Naples  for  the  weekend,  I
insisted that he come to lunch on Sunday. I insisted that he was not to talk to
me, not joke with Dede or Elsa, but focus the whole day on Imma. That visit, I
said, has to become a habit: it would be wonderful if you would come once a
week,  but  I  won’t  ask  that,  I  don’t  expect  that  from  you;  once  a  month,
however, is essential. He said in a serious tone that he would come every week,
he promised, and at that moment he was surely sincere.
I don’t remember the day of the phone call, but the day when, at ten in the
morning, Nino appeared in the neighborhood, elegantly dressed and driving a
brand-new luxury car, I will never forget. It was September 16, 1984. Lila and I
had just turned forty, Tina and Imma were almost four.
107.
I told Lila that Nino was coming to lunch at my house. I said to her: I forced
him,  I  want  him  to  spend  the  whole  day  with  Imma.  I  hoped  she  would
understand that for at least that one day she shouldn’t send Tina to my house,
but she didn’t understand or didn’t want to. Instead she acted helpful, she said:
I’ll tell my mother to cook for everyone and maybe we’ll eat here at my house
where there’s more room. I was surprised, and annoyed. She hated Nino; what
was that intrusion all about? I refused, I said: I’ll cook, and I repeated that the
day was dedicated to Imma, there would be no way and no time for anything
else. But exactly at nine the next day Tina climbed the stairs with her toys and
knocked at my door. She was tidy and neat, her black braids shiny, her eyes
sparkling with affection.
I told her to come in, but I immediately had to fight with Imma, who was still
in her pajamas, sleepy, she hadn’t had breakfast, and yet she wanted to start
playing immediately. Since she refused to obey me and kept making faces and
laughing with her friend, I got mad and closed Tina—frightened by my tone—in
a  room  to  play  by  herself,  then  I  made  Imma  wash.  I  don’t  want  to,  she
screamed. I told her: You have to get dressed, Papa is coming. I had been
announcing  it  for  days,  but  she,  hearing  that  word,  became  even  more
rebellious. I myself, in using it to signal to her the imminence of his arrival,
became more anxious. The child writhed, screamed: I don’t want Papa, as if
Papa were a repellent medicine. I ruled out that she remembered Nino, she
wasn’t  expressing  a  rejection  of  a  definite  person.  I  thought:  Maybe  I  was
wrong to make him come; when Imma says she doesn’t want Papa, she means
that she doesn’t want just anyone, she wants Enzo, she wants Pietro, she wants
what Tina and her sisters have.
At that point I remembered the other child. She hadn’t protested, she hadn’t
poked her head out. I was ashamed of my behavior. Tina was not responsible
for  the  day’s  tensions.  I  called  her  affectionately,  she  reappeared  and  sat
happily on a stool in a corner of the bathroom giving me advice on how to
braid Imma’s hair. My daughter brightened, she let me dress her up without
protesting. Finally they ran away to play and I went to get Dede and Elsa out of
bed. Elsa jumped up very happily, she was glad to see Nino again and was ready
in a short time. But Dede spent an infinite amount of time washing and came
out of the bathroom only because I started yelling. She couldn’t accept her
transformation.  I’m  disgusting,  she  said,  with  tears  in  her  eyes.  She  shut
herself in the bedroom crying that she didn’t want to see anyone.
I got myself ready in a hurry. I didn’t care about Nino, but I didn’t want him
to find me neglected and aged. And I was afraid that Lila would show up and I
was well aware that, if she wanted, she could focus a man’s gaze totally on her.
I was agitated and at the same time lethargic.
108.
Nino  was  exceedingly  punctual,  and  he  came  up  the  stairs  loaded  with
presents. Elsa ran to wait for him on the landing, immediately followed by Tina
and then, cautiously, Imma. I saw the tic appear in her right eye. Here’s Papa, I
told her, and she feebly shook her head no.
But Nino behaved well. Already on the stairs he began to sing: Where’s my
little Imma, I have to give her three kisses and a little bite. When he reached
the landing he said hi to Elsa, pulled one of Tina’s braids absentmindedly, and
grabbed his daughter, covered her with kisses, told her he had never seen such
pretty  hair,  complimented  her  dress,  her  shoes,  everything.  He  came  in
without even a greeting for me. Instead he sat down on the floor, lifted Imma
onto his crossed legs, and only then gave some encouragement to Elsa, and
warmly greeted Dede (Good Lord, how you’ve grown, you’re magnificent), who had
approached with a timid smile.
I saw that Tina was puzzled. Strangers, without exception, were dazzled by
her and cuddled her as soon as they saw her, whereas Nino had begun to
distribute the gifts and was ignoring her. She turned to him with her caressing
little voice and tried to take a place on his knees next to Imma, but she couldn’t
and leaned against his arm, put her head with a languid expression on one
shoulder. No, Nino gave Dede and Elsa each a book, then he focused on his
daughter. He had bought her all kinds of things. He waited for her to unwrap
one gift and immediately gave her another. Imma seemed charmed, moved.
She looked at that man as if he were a wizard who had come to cast spells for
her alone and when Tina tried to take a gift she cried: It’s mine. Tina quickly
drew back with her lower lip trembling, I picked her up, I said: Come with aunt.
Only then did Nino seem to realize that he was overdoing it and he dug in his
pocket, took out an expensive-looking pen, said: This is for you. I put the child
down on the floor, she took the pen whispering thank you and he seemed to
really see her for the first time. I heard him mutter in amazement: “You look
exactly like your mother.”
“Shall I write my name for you?” Tina asked, serious.
“You already know how to write?”
“Yes.”
Nino pulled a folded piece of paper out of his pocket, she put it on the floor
and wrote: “Tina.” Very good! he praised her. But a moment afterward he
sought my gaze, afraid of being reprimanded, and to remedy the situation he
turned to his daughter: I bet you’re very good, too. Imma wanted to show him,
and,  snatching  the  pen  away  from  her  friend,  scribbled  on  the  page  with
intense concentration. He complimented her profusely, even as Elsa tormented
her little sister (No one can understand that, you don’t know how to write) and Tina
tried in vain to get her pen back, saying: I know how to write other words, too.
Finally, Nino, to cut it off, stood up with his daughter and said: Now let’s go see
the most beautiful car in the world, and he carried them all off, Imma in his
arms, Tina trying to get him to take her hand, Dede pulling her away and
keeping her close, Elsa taking possession of the expensive pen with a greedy
gesture.
109.
The door closed behind them. I heard Nino’s thick voice on the stairs—he
was promising to buy sweets, to take them for a ride in the car—and Dede, Elsa,
and the two little girls shouting their excitement. I imagined Lila on the floor
below, shut in her apartment, in silence, while the same voices that reached
me reached her, too. Separating us was only a layer of floor, and yet she could
shorten  the  distance  further  or  expand  it  according  to  her  mood  and
convenience and the movements of her mind, which shifted like the sea when
the moon seizes it whole and pulls it upward. I tidied, cooked, I thought Lila—
below—was doing the same. We were both waiting to hear again the voices of
our daughters, the steps of the man we had loved. It occurred to me that she
must have recognized Nino’s features in Imma countless times, as he had just
now recognized hers in Tina. Had she always felt an aversion, all these years,
or was her loving concern for the child a result of that resemblance? Did she
still, in secret, like Nino? Was she observing him from the window? Had Tina
managed to get him to take her hand and was she looking at her daughter
beside that tall thin man, thinking: If things had gone differently she could be
his. What was she planning? Would she come up to my house, in a moment, to
wound me with a malicious comment? Or would she open the door of her
house just as he was passing by, returning with the four girls, and would she
invite  him  to  come  in  and  then  call  up  from  below,  so  that  I  would  be
compelled to invite her and Enzo to lunch, too?
The apartment was very silent, but outside there was a mixture of Sunday
sounds: the pealing bells of midday, the cries of vendors in the stalls, the trains
passing on the siding, the traffic of the trucks heading to work sites busy every
day of the week. Nino would no doubt let the girls fill up on sweets, without
thinking that they would not eat their lunch later. I knew him well: he granted
every request, he bought everything without batting an eye, he overdid it. As
soon as lunch was ready and the table set, I looked out the window onto the
stradone. I wanted to call them to say it was time to come home. But the stalls
impeded my view, all I could see was Marcello walking with my sister on one
side and Silvio on the other. The image of the stradone from above gave me a
sense of anguish. Sundays had always seemed to me a paint concealing the
decay, but that day the impression was stronger. What was I doing in that
place, why did I continue to live there, when I had enough money and could go
anywhere. I had given Lila too much rope, I had let her retie too many knots, I
myself had believed that, reassigning myself publicly to my origins, I would be
able to write better. Everything struck me as ugly, I felt a strong repulsion for
the food I had prepared. Then I pulled myself together, brushed my hair, made
sure that I looked all right, and went out. I passed Lila’s door almost on tiptoe; I
didn’t want her to hear me and decide to come with me.
Outside there was a strong odor of toasted almonds, I looked around. First I
saw Dede and Elsa, eating cotton candy and examining a stall selling junk:
bracelets, earrings, necklaces, hairpins. Not far away I could make out Nino,
standing at the corner. Only after a fraction of a second did I discover that he
was talking to Lila, beautiful the way she was when she wanted to be, and Enzo,
serious, frowning.
She was holding Imma, who was tormenting one of her ears, as she usually
did  with  mine  when  she  felt  neglected.  Lila  let  the  child  twist  it  roughly,
without  stopping  her,  she  was  apparently  so  absorbed  by  Nino,  who  was
talking in his pleasing way, smiling, gesturing with his long arms, his long
hands.
I was enraged. That’s why Nino had gone out and hadn’t been seen again.
Here was how he cared for his daughter. I called him, he didn’t hear me. Dede
turned,  she  laughed  with  Elsa  at  my  faint  voice,  they  always  did  when  I
shouted. I called again. I wanted Nino to come back right away, return home,
alone, alone with my daughters. But there was the deafening whistle of the
peanut seller and the din of a truck passing, every one of its parts rattling,
raising clouds of dust. I grumbled, I joined them. Why was Lila holding my
daughter in her arms, what need was there? And why was Imma not playing
with Tina? I didn’t say hello, I said to Imma: What are you doing being held,
you’re a big girl, come down, and I pulled her away from Lila. Then I turned to
Nino:  The  children  have  to  eat,  it’s  ready.  Meanwhile  I  realized  that  my
daughter was attached to my skirt, she hadn’t left me to run to her friend. I
looked around, I asked Lila: Where is Tina?
She still had on her face the expression of cordial assent with which until a
minute earlier she had been listening to Nino’s conversation. She must be with
Dede and Elsa, she said. I answered: She’s not. And I wanted her to see about
her daughter, together with Enzo, instead of inserting herself between mine
and her father on the only day he had made himself available. But while Enzo
looked around for Tina, Lila continued talking to Nino. She told him about the
times Gennaro had disappeared. She laughed, saying: One morning he couldn’t
be found, everyone had gone to school and he wasn’t there. I was terrified, I
imagined the worst things, and instead he was sitting quietly in the gardens.
But it was precisely as she remembered that episode that she lost color. Her
eyes emptied, in a changed voice she asked Enzo:
“Did you find her, where is she?”
110.
We  looked  for  Tina  along  the  stradone,  then  throughout  the  whole
neighborhood, then again along the stradone. Many people joined us. Antonio
came,  Carmen  came,  Roberto,  Carmen’s  husband,  came,  and  even  Marcello
Solara mobilized some of his people, walking the streets himself, until late into
the night. Lila now seemed like Melina, she ran here and there with no reason.
But Enzo seemed even crazier than she was. He screamed, he got angry at the
peddlers, he threatened terrible things, he wanted to look in their cars and
vans and carts. The carabinieri had to intervene to calm him.
At every moment it seemed that Tina had been found and there was a sigh of
relief. Everyone knew the child, there was no one who wouldn’t swear to have
seen  her  a  moment  before  standing  at  this  stall  or  that  corner  or  in  the
courtyard or in the gardens over by the tunnel with a tall man, a short one. But
every sighting turned out to be illusory, people lost faith and goodwill.
In the evening a rumor took hold that later prevailed. The child had left the
sidewalk to chase a blue ball. But just at that moment a truck was passing. The
truck was a mud-colored hulk, traveling at high speed, clattering and bouncing
because of the holes in the stradone. No one had seen anything else, but the
collision was heard, the collision that passed directly from the story into the
memory of whoever was listening. The truck hadn’t braked, or even tried to,
and had disappeared at the end of the stradone along with Tina’s body, her
braids. On the asphalt not a drop of blood remained, nothing, nothing at all. In
that nothing the vehicle was lost, the child was lost forever.
O A
LD  GE
The Story of Bad Blood
1.
I  left  Naples  definitively  in  1995,  when  everyone  said  that  the  city  was
reviving. But I no longer believed in its resurrections. Over the years I had seen
the advent of the new railway station, the dull tower of the skyscraper on Via
Novara, the soaring structures of Scampia, the proliferation of tall, shining
buildings above the gray stone of Arenaccia, of Via Taddeo da Sessa, of Piazza
Nazionale. Those buildings, conceived in France or Japan and rising between
Ponticelli  and  Poggioreale  with  the  usual  breakdowns  and  delays,  had
immediately,  at  high  speed,  lost  all  their  luster  and  become  dens  for  the
desperate. So what resurrection? It was only cosmetic, a powder of modernity
applied randomly, and boastfully, to the corrupt face of the city.
It happened like that every time. The scam of rebirth raised hopes and then
shattered them, became crust upon ancient crusts. Thus, just as the obligation
arose to stay in the city and support the revival under the leadership of the
former Communist party, I decided to leave for Turin, drawn by the possibility
of running a publishing house that at the time was full of ambition. Once I
turned forty, time had begun to race, I couldn’t keep up. The real calendar had
been  replaced  by  one  of  contract  deadlines,  the  years  leaped  from  one
publication to the next; giving dates to the events that concerned me, and my
daughters, cost me a lot, and I forced them into the writing, which took me
more and more time. When had this or that happened? In an almost heedless
way I oriented myself by the publication dates of my books.
I  now  had  quite  a  few  books  behind  me,  and  they  had  won  me  some
authority, a good reputation, a comfortable life. Over time the weight of my
daughters had greatly diminished. Dede and Elsa—first one, then the other—
had gone to study in Boston, encouraged by Pietro, who for seven or eight
years had had a professorship at Harvard. They were at ease with their father.
Apart from the letters in which they complained about the cruel climate and
the pedantry of the Bostonians, they were satisfied, with themselves and with
escaping the choices that, in the past, I had compelled them to confront. At
that point, since Imma was desperate to do what her sisters had, what was I
doing in the neighborhood? If at first the image of the writer who, although
able to live elsewhere, had stayed in a dangerous outlying neighborhood to
continue to nourish herself on reality, had been useful to me, now there were
many intellectuals who prided themselves on the same cliché. And my books
had taken other paths, the material of the neighborhood had been set aside.
Wasn’t it therefore hypocritical to have a certain fame, and many advantages,
and yet to limit myself, to live in a place where I could only record uneasily the
deterioration  of  the  lives  of  my  siblings,  my  friends,  their  children  and
grandchildren, maybe even of my last daughter?
Imma was then fourteen; I didn’t deprive her of anything, and she studied
hard. But if necessary she spoke in a harsh dialect, she had schoolmates I didn’t
like, I was so worried if she went out after dinner that often she decided to stay
home. I, too, when I was in the city, had a limited life. I saw my friends from
cultured Naples, I let myself be courted and embarked on relationships, but
they never lasted. Even the most brilliant men sooner or later turned out to be
disillusioned, raging at a cruel fate, witty and yet subtly malicious. At times I
had the impression that they wanted me mainly so that they could give me
their manuscripts to read, ask me about television or the movies, in some cases
borrow money that they never paid back. I made the best of it, exerting myself
to have a social and emotional life. But going out at night, dressed up, wasn’t a
pleasure, it was a cause of anxiety. On one occasion I didn’t have time to close
the street door behind me before I was beaten and robbed by two kids who
were no more than thirteen. The taxi driver, who was waiting right out front,
didn’t even look out the window. So in the summer of 1995 I left Naples with
Imma.
I rented an apartment on the Po, near the Isabella Bridge, and my life and
that  of  my  third  daughter  immediately  improved.  From  there  it  became
simpler to reflect on Naples, to write about it and let myself write about it with
lucidity. I loved my city, but I uprooted from myself any dutiful defense of it. I
was convinced, rather, that the anguish in which that love sooner or later
ended was a lens through which to look at the entire West. Naples was the
great European metropolis where faith in technology, in science, in economic
development, in the kindness of nature, in history that leads of necessity to
improvement, in democracy, was revealed, most clearly and far in advance, to
be completely without foundation. To be born in that city—I went so far as to
write once, thinking not of myself but of Lila’s pessimism—is useful for only
one  thing:  to  have  always  known,  almost  instinctively,  what  today,  with
endless fine distinctions, everyone is beginning to claim: that the dream of
unlimited progress is in reality a nightmare of savagery and death.
In 2000 I was left alone; Imma went to study in Paris. I tried to convince her
that there was no need, but since many of her friends had decided to go, she
didn’t want to be left out. At first it didn’t bother me, I had a busy life. But
within a few years I began to feel old age, it was as if I were fading along with
the world in which I had established myself. Although I had won, at various
times and with various works, some prestigious prizes, my books were now
hardly selling at all: in 2003, for example, the thirteen novels and two volumes
of essays I had published earned altogether twenty-three hundred and twenty-
three euros before taxes. I had to acknowledge, at that point, that my audience
expected nothing more from me and that younger readers—it would be more
accurate to say younger women readers; from the start it was mainly women
who read my books—had other tastes, other interests. The newspapers were no
longer a source of income, either. They weren’t interested in me; they rarely
asked for articles, and paid nothing or next to nothing. As for television, after
some successful experiences in the nineties, I had tried to do an afternoon
show  devoted  to  classics  of  Greek  and  Latin  literature,  an  idea  that  was
accepted only thanks to the regard of some friends, including Armando Galiani,
who had a show on Channel 5 but good relations with public television. It was
an unquestionable fiasco and I had not had other opportunities. Things also
deteriorated at the publishing house I had run for many years. In the fall of
2004 I was pushed out by a clever young man, scarcely over thirty, and reduced
to an external consultant. I was sixty, I felt my journey was ending. In Turin
the  winters  were  too  cold,  the  summers  too  hot,  the  cultured  classes
unwelcoming. I was anxious, I didn’t sleep much. Men no longer noticed me. I
looked out at the Po from my balcony, at the rowers, the hill, and I was bored.
I began to go more frequently to Naples, but I had no wish to see friends and
relatives, and friends and relatives had no wish to see me. I saw only Lila, but
often, by my choice, not even her. She made me uneasy. In recent years she
had become passionate about the city with a chauvinism that seemed crude, so
I preferred to walk alone on Via Caracciolo, or go up to the Vomero, or walk
through the Tribunali. So it happened that in the spring of 2006, shut up in an
old hotel on Corso Vittorio Emanuele during an incessant rain, I wrote, in a few
days, to pass the time, a narrative of scarcely eighty pages that was set in the
neighborhood and told the story of Tina. I wrote it rapidly in order not to give
myself  time  to  invent.  The  pages  were  terse,  direct.  The  story  took  off
imaginatively only at the end.
I published the book in the fall of 2007 with the title A Friendship. It was very
well received, and it still sells well today; teachers recommend it to students as
summer reading.
But I hate it.
Just two years earlier, when Gigliola’s body was found in the gardens—she
had died of a heart attack, in solitude, a death terrible in its bleakness—Lila had
made me promise that I would never write about her. Instead, here, I had done
it, and I had done it in the most direct way. For a few months I believed that I
had written my best book, and my fame as a writer took off again; it was a long
time since I’d had such success. But already by the end of 2007—during the
Christmas season—when I went to Feltrinelli in Piazza dei Martiri to present A
Friendship,  I  suddenly  felt  ashamed  and  was  afraid  of  seeing  Lila  in  the
audience, maybe the front row, ready to interrupt and make trouble for me.
But the evening went very well, I was much celebrated. When I returned to the
hotel, a bit more confident, I tried to telephone her, first on the regular phone,
then  on  the  cell,  then  again  on  the  other.  She  didn’t  answer,  she  hasn’t
answered me since.
2.
I don’t know how to recount Lila’s grief. What befell her, what had perhaps
been lying in wait in her life forever, was not the death of a daughter through
illness,  an  accident,  an  act  of  violence,  but  her  daughter’s  sudden
disappearance.  The  grief  couldn’t  coagulate  around  anything.  She  had  no
lifeless  body  to  cling  to  in  despair,  there  was  no  one  for  whom  to  hold  a
funeral,  she  couldn’t  linger  before  a  corpse  that  had  walked,  run,  talked,
hugged her, and had ended up a broken thing. Lila felt, I think, as if a limb,
which until a moment before had been part of her body, had lost form and
substance without undergoing any trauma. But I don’t know the suffering that
derived from it well enough, nor can I imagine it.
In the ten years that followed the loss of Tina, although I continued to live in
the same building, although I met Lila every day, I never saw her cry, I never
witnessed a crisis of despair. After at first rushing through the neighborhood,
day and night, in that vain search for her daughter, she gave in as if she were
too  weary.  She  sat  beside  the  kitchen  window  and  didn’t  move  for  a  long
period, even though from there you could see only a slice of the railroad and a
little sky. Then she pulled herself together and began normal life again, but
without resignation. The years washed over her, her nasty character got even
worse, she sowed uneasiness and fear, she grew old screeching, quarreling. At
first she talked about Tina on every occasion and with anyone, she clung to the
name of the child as if uttering it would serve to bring her back. But later it was
impossible even to mention that loss in her presence, and even if it was I who
did so she got rid of me rudely after a few seconds. She seemed to appreciate
only a letter from Pietro, mainly—I think—because he managed to write to her
lovingly without ever mentioning Tina. Even in 1995, before I left, except on
very rare occasions she acted as if nothing had happened. Once Pinuccia spoke
of the child as a little angel watching over us all. Lila said: Get out.
3.
No  one  in  the  neighborhood  put  faith  in  the  forces  of  order  or  in  the
journalists. Men, women, even gangs of kids spent days and weeks looking for
Tina, ignoring the police and television. All the relatives, all the friends were
mobilized.  The  only  one  who  turned  up  just  a  couple  of  times—and  by
telephone, with generic phrases that existed only to be repeated: I have no
responsibility, I had just handed the child over to Lina and Enzo—was Nino. But
I wasn’t surprised, he was one of those adults who when they play with a child
and the child falls and skins his knee behave like children themselves, afraid
that someone will say: It was you who let him fall. Besides, no one gave him
any importance, we forgot about him in a few hours. Enzo and Lila trusted
Antonio above all, and he put off his departure for Germany yet again, to track
down  Tina.  He  did  it  out  of  friendship  but  also,  as  he  himself  explained,
surprising us, because Michele Solara had ordered him to.
The Solaras undertook more than anyone else in that business of the child’s
disappearance and—I have to say—they made their involvement highly visible.
Although they knew they would be treated with hostility they appeared one
evening at Lila’s house with the attitude of those who are speaking for an
entire  community,  and  they  vowed  they  would  do  everything  possible  to
return Tina safe and sound to her parents. Lila stared at them the whole time
as if she saw them but didn’t hear them. Enzo, extremely pale, listened for a
few minutes and then cried that it was they who had taken his daughter. He
said  it  then  and  on  many  other  occasions,  he  shouted  it  everywhere:  the
Solaras had taken Tina away from them because he and Lila had refused to give
them a percentage of the profits of Basic Sight. He wanted someone to object
so that he could murder him. But no one ever objected in his presence. That
evening not even the two brothers objected.
“We understand your grief,” Marcello said. “If they had taken Silvio I would
have gone mad, just like you.”
They waited for someone to calm Enzo and they left. The next day they sent
on a courtesy call their wives, Gigliola and Elisa, who were welcomed without
warmth but more politely. And later they multiplied their initiatives. Probably
it was the Solaras who organized a sort of roundup of all the street peddlers
who were usually present in the neighborhood on Sundays and holidays and of
all the Gypsies in the area. And certainly they were at the head of a real surge
of  anger  against  the  police  when  they  arrived,  sirens  blasting,  to  arrest
Stefano,  who  had  his  first  heart  attack  at  that  time  and  ended  up  in  the
hospital, and then Rino, who was released in a few days, and finally Gennaro,
who wept for hours, swearing that he loved his little sister more than any
other person in the world and would never harm her. Nor can it be ruled out
that they were the ones responsible for surveillance of the elementary school—
thanks to which the “faggot seducer of children,” who until then had been only
a popular fantasy, materialized. A slender man of around thirty who, although
he didn’t have children to deliver to the entrance and pick up at the exit,
appeared just the same at the school, was beaten, managed to escape, was
pursued by a furious mob to the gardens. There he would surely have been
murdered if he hadn’t managed to explain that he wasn’t what they thought
but a trainee at Il Mattino looking for news.
After that episode the neighborhood began to settle down, people slowly
slipped back into the life of every day. Since no trace of Tina was found, the
rumor of the truck hitting her became increasingly plausible. Those who were
tired  of  searching  took  it  seriously,  both  police  and  journalists.  Attention
shifted to the construction sites in the area and remained there for a long time.
It was at that point that I saw Armando Galiani, the son of my high-school
teacher. He had stopped practicing medicine, had lost in the parliamentary
elections of 1983, and now, thanks to a scruffy local television station, he was
attempting an aggressive type of journalism. I knew that his father had died a
little over a year earlier and that his mother lived in France but wasn’t in good
health, either. He asked me to take him to Lila’s, I said Lila wasn’t at all well. He
insisted, I telephoned. Lila struggled to remember Armando, but when she did
she—who until that moment hadn’t spoken to journalists—agreed to see him.
Armando  explained  that  he  had  been  investigating  the  aftermath  of  the
earthquake and that traveling around to the construction sites he had heard of
a truck that was scrapped in a hurry because of a terrible thing it had been
involved in. Lila let him speak, then said:
“You’re making it all up.”
“I’m saying what I know.”
“You  don’t  care  a  thing  about  the  truck,  the  construction  sites,  or  my
daughter.”
“You’re insulting me.”
“No, I’ll insult you now. You were disgusting as a doctor, disgusting as a
revolutionary, and now you’re disgusting as a journalist. Get out of my house.”
Armando scowled, nodded goodbye to Enzo, and left. Out on the street he
looked annoyed. He said: Not even that great sorrow has changed her, tell her I
wanted to help. Then he did a long interview with me and we said goodbye. I
was struck by his kind manners, by his attentiveness to words. He must have
been through some bad times both when Nadia made her decisions and when
he separated from his wife. Now, though, he seemed in good shape. His old
attitude, of a know-it-all who follows a strict anticapitalist line, had turned into
a painful cynicism.
“Italy has become a cesspool,” he said in an aggrieved tone, “and we’ve all
ended up in it. If you travel around, you see that the respectable people have
understood. What a pity, Elena, what a pity. The workers’ parties are full of
honest people who have been left without hope.”
“Why did you start doing this job?”
“For the same reason you do yours.”
“What’s that?”
“Once I was unable to hide behind anything, I discovered I was vain.”
“Who says I’m vain?”
“The  comparison:  your  friend  isn’t.  But  I’m  sorry  for  her,  vanity  is  a
resource. If you’re vain you pay attention to yourself and your affairs. Lina is
without vanity, so she lost her daughter.”
I followed his work for a while, he seemed good at it. He tracked down the
burned-out wreck of an old vehicle in the neighborhood of the Ponti Rossi, and
connected it to Tina’s disappearance. The news caused a certain sensation, it
reverberated in the national dailies, and remained in the news for several days.
Then it was ascertained that there was no possible connection between the
burned vehicle and the child’s disappearance. Lila said to me:
“Tina is alive, I never want to see that piece of shit again.”
4.
I don’t know how long she believed that her daughter was still alive. The
more Enzo despaired, worn out by tears and rage, the more Lila said: You’ll see,
they’ll give her back. Certainly she never believed in the hit-and-run truck, she
said that she would have noticed right away, that before anyone else she would
have heard the collision, or at least a cry. And it didn’t seem to me that she
gave credence to Enzo’s thesis, either, she never alluded to involvement on the
part of the Solaras. Instead for a long period she thought that one of her clients
had  taken  Tina,  someone  who  knew  what  Basic  Sight  earned  and  wanted
money in exchange for the child. That was also Antonio’s thesis, but it’s hard to
say what concrete facts inspired it. Of course the police were interested in that
possibility, but since there were never any telephone calls asking for ransom
they finally let it go.
The neighborhood was soon divided into a majority that believed Tina was
dead and a minority that thought she was alive and a prisoner somewhere. We
who loved Lila dearly were part of that minority. Carmen was so sure of it that
she repeated it insistently to everyone, and if, as time passed, someone was
persuaded that Tina was dead she became that person’s enemy. I once heard
her whisper to Enzo: Tell Lina that Pasquale is with you, he thinks the child will
be found. But the majority prevailed, and those who kept on looking for Tina
seemed  to  the  majority  either  stupid  or  hypocritical.  People  also  began  to
think that Lila’s intelligence wasn’t helping her.
Carmen was the first to intuit that the respect our friend had inspired before
Tina’s  disappearance  and  the  solidarity  that  arose  afterward  were  both
superficial, an old aversion toward her lurked underneath. Look, she said to
me, once they treated her as if she were the Madonna and now they pass by
her without even a glance. I began to pay attention and saw that it was true.
Deep inside, people thought: we’re sorry you lost Tina, but it means that if you
had truly been what you wanted us to believe, nothing and no one would have
touched you. On the street, when we were together, they began to greet me but
not  her.  They  were  put  off  by  her  troubled  expression  and  the  cloud  of
misfortune they saw around her. In other words, the part of the neighborhood
that  had  become  used  to  thinking  of  Lila  as  an  alternative  to  the  Solaras
withdrew in disappointment.
Not only that. An initiative was undertaken that at first seemed kind but
then became malicious. In the early weeks, flowers, emotional notes addressed
to Lila or directly to Tina, even poems copied from schoolbooks appeared at
the entrance to the house, at the door of Basic Sight. Then there were old toys
brought by mothers, grandmothers, and children. Then barrettes, colorful hair
ribbons, old shoes. Then puppets sewed by hand, with ugly sneers, stained with
red,  and  animal  carcasses  wrapped  in  dirty  rags.  Since  Lila  calmly  picked
everything  up  and  threw  it  into  the  trash,  but  suddenly  began  screaming
horrible curses at anyone who passed by, especially the children, who observed
her from a distance, she went from being a mother who inspired pity to a
madwoman who spread terror. When a girl she had been angry with because
she had seen her writing with chalk on the doorway, the dead are eating Tina,
became seriously ill, old rumors joined the new and people avoided Lila, as if
just to look at her could bring misfortune.
Yet  she  seemed  not  to  realize  it.  The  certainty  that  Tina  was  still  alive
absorbed her completely and it was what, I think, pushed her toward Imma. In
the  first  months  I  had  tried  to  reduce  the  contact  between  her  and  my
youngest daughter, I was afraid that seeing her would cause more suffering.
But Lila soon seemed to want her around constantly, and I let her keep her
even to sleep. One morning when I went to get her the door of the house was
half open, I went in. My child was asking about Tina. After that Sunday I had
tried to soothe her by telling her that Tina had gone to stay for a while with
Enzo’s relatives in Avellino, but she kept asking when she would return. Now
she was asking Lila directly, but Lila seemed not to hear Imma’s voice, and
instead of answering was telling her in detail about Tina’s birth, her first toy,
how she attached herself to her breast and never let go, things like that. I
stopped  in  the  doorway  for  a  few  seconds,  I  heard  Imma  interrupt  her
impatiently:
“But when is she coming back?”
“Do you feel lonely?”
“I don’t know who to play with.”
“I don’t, either.”
“Then when is she coming back?”
Lila said nothing for a long moment, then scolded her:
“It’s none of your business, shut up.”
Those words, uttered in dialect, were so brusque, so harsh, so unsuitable
that I was alarmed. I said something, brought my child home.
I had always forgiven Lila her excesses and in those circumstances I was
inclined to do so even more than in the past. She often went too far, and as
much  as  possible  I  tried  to  get  her  to  be  reasonable.  When  the  police
interrogated Stefano and she was immediately convinced that he had taken
Tina—so that at first she refused even to visit him in the hospital after the
heart attack—I mollified her, and we went together to visit him. And it was
thanks to me that she hadn’t attacked her brother when the police questioned
him. I had also done all I could on the awful day when Gennaro was summoned
to  the  police  station  and,  once  at  home,  felt  himself  accused;  there  was  a
quarrel, and he went to live at his father’s house, shouting at Lila that she had
lost forever not only Tina but also him. The situation, in other words, was
terrible and I could understand why she fought with everyone, even me. But
with Imma, no, I couldn’t allow it. From then on, when Lila took the child I
became anxious, I pondered, I looked for ways out.
But there was little to do; the threads of her grief were tangled and Imma
was for a time part of that tangle. In the general chaos where we had all ended
up, Lila, despite her weariness, continued to tell me about my daughter’s every
little difficulty, as she had done until I decided to insist that Nino visit. I felt
angry, I was irritated, and yet I tried also to see a positive aspect: she’s slowly
shifting onto Imma—I thought—her maternal love, she’s saying to me: Since
you’ve  been  lucky,  and  you  still  have  your  daughter,  you  ought  to  take
advantage of it, pay attention to her, give her all the care you haven’t given
her.
But that was only the appearance of things. Soon I had a different theory:
that, more deeply, Imma—her body—must be a symbol of guilt. I thought often
of the situation in which the little girl had been lost. Nino had handed her over
to Lila but Lila hadn’t attended to her. She had said to her daughter, You wait here,
and to my daughter, Come with your aunt. She had done it, perhaps, to show off
Imma to her father, to praise her to him, to stir his affection, who knows. But
Tina  was  lively,  or  more  simply  she  had  felt  neglected,  offended,  and  had
wandered off. As a result Lila’s suffering had made a nest in the weight of
Imma’s body in her arms, in the contact, in the living warmth it still gave off.
But my daughter was fragile, slow, different in every way from Tina, who was
shining, vivacious. Imma could in no way become a substitute, she was only
holding back time. I imagined, in other words, that Lila kept her nearby in
order to stay within that terrible Sunday, and meanwhile thought: Tina is here,
soon she’ll pull on my skirt, she’ll call me, and then I’ll pick her up in my arms,
and everything will return to its place. That was why she didn’t want the child
to upset everything. When the little girl kept asking for her friend, when she
merely reminded Lila that in fact Tina wasn’t there, Lila treated her with the
same harshness with which she treated us adults. But I couldn’t accept that. As
soon as she came to get Imma, I found some excuse or other to send Dede or
Elsa to watch her. If she had used that tone when I was present, what might
happen when she took her away for hours?
5.
Every  so  often  I  escaped  from  the  apartment,  from  the  flight  of  stairs
between my rooms and hers, from the gardens, the stradone, and left for work.
These  were  moments  when  I  sighed  with  relief:  I  put  on  makeup,  stylish
clothes, even the slight limp that remained from the pregnancy was a sort of
pleasingly  distinctive  trait.  Although  I  frequently  made  sarcastic  remarks
about  the  ill-humored  behavior  of  literary  people  and  artists,  at  the  time
everything  having  to  do  with  publishing,  cinema,  television—every  type  of
aesthetic  display—seemed  to  me  a  fantastic  landscape  in  which  it  was
marvelous to appear. I liked being present in the extravagant, festive chaos of
big conventions, big conferences, big theater productions, big exhibitions, big
films, big operas, and I was flattered on the few occasions when I had a place in
the front rows, the reserved seats, from which, sitting among famous people, I
could observe the spectacle of powers large and small. Lila, on the other hand,
remained at the center of her horror, without any distraction. Once I had an
invitation to an opera at the San Carlo—a magnificent place where not even I
had been—and I insisted on taking her; she didn’t want to go, and persuaded
Carmen to go instead. The only distraction, if that is the right word for it, she
would allow was another reason for suffering. A new affliction acted on her as
a sort of antidote. She became combative, determined, she was like someone
who knows she has to drown but in spite of herself agitates her arms and legs
to stay afloat.
One  night  she  discovered  that  her  son  had  started  shooting  up  again.
Without saying a word, without even telling Enzo, she went to get him from
Stefano, in the house in the new neighborhood where decades earlier she had
lived as a bride. But he wasn’t there: Gennaro had quarreled with his father,
too, and a few days earlier had moved to his uncle Rino’s. She was greeted with
open  hostility  by  Stefano  and  Marisa,  who  now  lived  together.  That  once
handsome man was now skin and bones, and very pale; his clothes seemed
several sizes too big. The heart attack had crushed him, he was frightened, he
scarcely ate, he didn’t drink, he no longer smoked, he wasn’t supposed to get
upset, because of his bad heart. But on that occasion he became extremely
upset and had reason to be. He had closed the grocery because of his illness.
Ada demanded money for herself and their daughter. His sister Pinuccia and
his mother, Maria, also demanded money. Marisa demanded it for herself and
her children. Lila understood immediately that Stefano wanted that money
from her and that the excuse for getting it was Gennaro. In fact, although he
had thrown his son out of the house, he took his side; he said, and Marisa
supported him, that it would take a lot of money to get treatment for Gennaro.
And since Lila replied that she would never give a cent to anyone, she didn’t
give a damn about relatives, friends, or the whole neighborhood, the quarrel
became furious. With tears in his eyes, Stefano listed all he had lost over the
years—from the grocery stores to the house itself—and for those losses he in
some obscure way blamed Lila. But the worst came from Marisa, who yelled at
her: Alfonso was ruined because of you, you’ve ruined us all, you’re worse than
the Solaras, whoever stole your child did a good thing.
Only at that point did Lila become silent, she looked around for a chair to sit
on.  She  couldn’t  find  one  and  leaned  against  the  living  room  wall,  which,
decades  earlier,  had  been  her  living  room,  a  white  room  at  the  time,  the
furniture brand-new, nothing yet damaged by the havoc of the children who
had grown up there, by the carelessness of the adults. Let’s go, Stefano said to
her, perhaps realizing that Marisa had gone too far, let’s go get Gennaro. And
they left together; he took her by the arm, and they went to Rino’s house.
Once they were outside, Lila recovered, and freed herself. They walked, she a
few steps ahead. Her brother lived in the Carraccis’ old house, with his mother-
in-law, Pinuccia, their children. Gennaro was there and as soon as he saw his
parents he began shouting. So another fight broke out, first between father
and son, then between mother and son. For a while Rino was silent, then, his
eyes dull, he began whining about the harm his sister had done since they were
children.  When  Stefano  intervened  Rino  got  angry  at  him,  insulted  him,
insisted that all the trouble had started when he wanted to make people think
he was someone and instead he had been cheated first by Lila and then by the
Solaras. They were about to come to blows and Pinuccia had to restrain her
husband, muttering, You’re right, but calm down, this isn’t the moment, while
the old lady, Maria, had to restrain Stefano, wheezing: That’s enough, son,
pretend you didn’t hear him, Rino is sicker than you. At that point Lila grabbed
her son forcefully by the arm and took him away.
But Rino followed them to the street, they heard him limping after them. He
wanted money, he wanted it at all costs, right away. He said: You’ll kill me if
you  leave  me  like  this.  Lila  kept  walking  while  he  pushed  her,  laughed,
moaned, held her back by the arm. Gennaro began to cry, he yelled at her: You
have money, Ma, give it to him. But Lila drove her brother away and brought
her son home, hissing: You want to become like that, you want to end up like
your uncle?
6.
With the return of Gennaro the apartment below became an even worse
inferno; at times I was compelled to go down because I was afraid they’d kill
each other. Lila opened the door, said coldly: What do you want. I answered
just as coldly: You’re overdoing it, Dede’s crying, she wants to call the police,
and Elsa is scared. She answered: Stay in your own home and plug up your
children’s ears if they don’t want to hear.
In that period she showed less and less interest in the two girls; with explicit
sarcasm she called them the young ladies. But my daughters’ attitude toward
her changed as well. Dede especially stopped feeling her fascination, as if in
her  eyes,  too,  Tina’s  disappearance  had  taken  away  Lila’s  authority.  One
evening she asked me: “If Aunt Lina didn’t want another child why did she
have one?”
“How do you know she didn’t want one?”
“She told Imma.”
“Imma?”
“Yes, I heard it with my own ears. She talks to her as if she weren’t a child, I
think she’s insane.”
“It’s not insanity, Dede, it’s grief.”
“She’s never shed a tear.”
“Tears aren’t grief.”
“Yes, but without tears how can you be sure that the grief is there?”
“It’s there and often it’s an even greater suffering.”
“That’s not her case. You want to know what I think?”
“All right.”
“She lost Tina on purpose. And now she also wants to lose Gennaro. Not to
mention Enzo, don’t you see how she treats him? Aunt Lina is just like Elsa, she
doesn’t love anyone.”
Dede was like that, she wanted to be someone who is more perceptive than
everyone else, and loved to formulate judgments without appeal. I forbade her
to repeat those terrible words in Lila’s presence and tried to explain to her that
not  all  human  beings  react  in  the  same  way,  Lila  and  Elsa  had  emotional
strategies different from hers.
“Your sister, for example,” I said, “doesn’t confront emotional issues the way
you do; she finds feelings that are too intense ridiculous, and she always stands
back a step.”
“By standing back a step she’s lost any sensitivity.”
“Why are you so annoyed with Elsa?”
“Because she’s just like Aunt Lina.”
A vicious circle: Lila was wrong because she was like Elsa, Elsa was wrong
because she was like Lila. In reality at the center of this negative judgment was
Gennaro. According to Dede, precisely in this crucial situation Elsa and Lila
were making the same mistaken assessment and showed the same emotional
disorder. Just as for Lila, for Elsa, too, Gennaro was worse than a beast. Her
sister—Dede reported to me—often told her, to offend her, that Lila and Enzo
were right to beat him as soon as he tried to stick his nose out of the house.
Only someone as stupid as you—she taunted her—who doesn’t know anything
about men, could be dazzled by a mass of unwashed flesh without a crumb of
intelligence. And Dede replied: Only a bitch like you could describe a human
being that way.
Since they both read a lot, they quarreled in the language of books, so that, if
they didn’t slip suddenly into the most brutal dialect to insult each other, I
would have listened to their squabbling almost with admiration. The positive
side  of  the  conflict  was  that  Dede’s  rancor  toward  me  diminished,  but  the
negative side burdened me greatly: her sister and Lila became the object of all
her malice. Dede was constantly reporting to me Elsa’s disgraceful actions: she
was  hated  by  her  schoolmates  because  she  considered  herself  the  best  at
everything  and  was  always  humiliating  them;  she  boasted  of  having  had
relations with adult men; she skipped school and forged my signature on the
absence slips. Of Lila she said: She’s a fascist, how can you be her friend? And
she  took  Gennaro’s  side  with  no  equivocation.  In  her  view  drugs  were  a
rebellion of sensitive people against the forces of repression. She swore that
sooner or later she would find a way of getting Rino out—she always called him
that, and only that, habituating us to call him that, too—from the prison in
which his mother kept him.
I tried whenever I could to throw water on the flames, I reprimanded Elsa, I
defended Lila. But sometimes it was hard to take Lila’s part. The peaks of her
bitter  grief  frightened  me.  On  the  other  hand  I  was  afraid  that,  as  had
happened in the past, her body wouldn’t hold up, and so, even though I liked
Dede’s lucid and yet passionate aggression, even though I found Elsa’s quirky
impudence amusing, I was careful not to let my daughters set off crises with
reckless  words.  (I  knew  that  Dede  would  have  been  more  than  capable  of
saying: Aunt Lina, tell things as they are, you wanted to lose Tina, it didn’t happen by
chance.) But every day I feared the worst. The young ladies, as Lila called them,
although they were immersed in the reality of the neighborhood, had a strong
sense that they were different. Especially when they returned from Florence
they felt they were of superior quality and did all they could to demonstrate it.
Dede  was  doing  very  well  in  high  school  and  when  her  professor—a  very
cultivated  man  no  more  than  forty,  awestruck  by  the  surname  Airota—
interrogated her he seemed more worried that he would make a mistake in the
questions than that she would make a mistake in the answers. Elsa was less
brilliant scholastically, and her midyear report cards were generally poor, but
what made her intolerable was the ease with which at the end she shuffled the
cards and came in among the top. I knew their insecurities and terrors, I felt
them  to  be  fearful  girls,  and  so  I  didn’t  put  much  credence  in  their
domineering attitudes. But others did, and seen from the outside they must
surely  have  seemed  odious.  Elsa,  for  example,  gleefully  bestowed  offensive
nicknames in class and outside, she had no respect for anyone. She called Enzo
the mute bumpkin; she called Lila the poisonous moth; she called Gennaro the
laughing crocodile. But she was especially irked by Antonio, who went to Lila’s
almost every day, either to the office or to her house, and as soon as he arrived
drew her and Enzo into a room to conspire. Antonio, after the episode of Tina,
had become cantankerous. If I was present he more or less explicitly took his
leave; if it was my daughters, he cut them off by closing the door. Elsa, who
knew Poe well, called him the mask of yellow death, because Antonio had a
naturally jaundiced complexion. It was obvious, therefore, that I should fear
some blunder on their part. Which duly happened.
I was in Milan. Lila rushed into the courtyard, where Dede was reading, Elsa
was talking to some friends, Imma was playing. They weren’t children. Dede
was sixteen, Elsa almost thirteen; only Imma was little, she was five. But Lila
treated all three as if they had no autonomy. She dragged them into the house
without explanation (they were used to hearing explanations), crying only that
staying  outside  was  dangerous.  My  oldest  daughter  found  that  behavior
unbearable, she said: “Mamma entrusted my sisters to me, it’s up to me to
decide whether to go inside or not.”
“When your mother isn’t here I’m your mother.”
“A shit mother,” Dede answered, moving to dialect. “You lost Tina and you
haven’t even cried.”
Lila slapped her, crushing her. Elsa defended her sister and was slapped in
turn, Imma burst into tears. You don’t go out of the house, my friend repeated,
gasping, outside it’s dangerous, outside you’ll die. She kept them inside for
days, until I returned.
When I returned, Dede recounted the whole episode, and, honest as she was,
on  principle,  she  also  reported  her  own  ugly  response.  I  wanted  her  to
understand that what she had said was terrible, and I scolded her harshly: I
warned you not to. Elsa sided with her sister, she explained to me that Aunt
Lina was out of her mind, she was possessed by the idea that to escape danger
you had to live barricaded in the house. It was hard to convince my daughters
that it wasn’t Lila’s fault but the Soviet empire’s. In a place called Chernobyl a
nuclear power plant had exploded and emitted dangerous radiation that, since
the planet was small, could be absorbed by anyone. Aunt Lina was protecting
you, I said. But Elsa shouted: It’s not true, she beat us, the only good thing is
that she fed us only frozen food. Imma: I cried a lot, I don’t like frozen food.
And Dede: She treated us worse than she treats Rino. I said: Aunt Lina would
have behaved the same way with Tina, think of what torture it must have been
for her to protect you, imagining that her daughter is somewhere and no one’s
taking care of her. But it was a mistake to express myself like that in front of
Imma. While Dede and Elsa looked skeptical, she was upset, and ran away to
play.
A few days later Lila confronted me in her direct way: “Is it you who tell
your daughters that I lost Tina and never cried?”
“Stop it, do you think I would say a thing like that?”
“Dede called me a shit mother.”
“She’s a child.”
“She’s a very rude child.”
At that point I committed errors no less serious than those of my daughters.
I said: “Calm down. I know how much you loved Tina. Try not to keep it all
inside, you should let it out, you should say whatever comes into your mind. I
know the birth was difficult, but you shouldn’t elaborate on it.”
I got everything wrong: the past tense of “you loved,” the allusion to the
birth, the fatuous tone. She answered curtly: Mind your own business. And
then she cried, as if Imma were an adult: Teach your daughter that if someone
tells her something, she shouldn’t go around repeating it.
7.
Things got even worse when, one morning—I think it was in June of 1986—
there was another disappearance. Nunzia arrived, grimmer than usual, and
said that Rino hadn’t returned home the previous night, that Pinuccia was
looking for him all over the neighborhood. She gave me the news without
looking at me, as she did when what she was telling me was really meant for
Lila.
I went downstairs to report it. Lila immediately summoned Gennaro—she
took it for granted that he would know where his uncle was. The boy resisted,
he didn’t want to reveal anything that might lead his mother to become even
harsher. But when the entire day passed and Rino still couldn’t be found, he
decided to cooperate. The next morning he refused to let Enzo and Lila come
with him on the search, but resigned himself to the company of his father.
Stefano arrived out of breath, nervous because of yet another difficulty that his
brother-in-law was causing, apprehensive because of his own ill health, and,
continually  touching  his  throat,  said,  ashen-faced:  I  can’t  breathe.  Finally
father and son—the boy large, the man looking like a stick in his oversized
clothes—set off for the railroad.
They crossed the switching yard and walked along the old tracks where
disused cars had been abandoned. In one of them they found Rino. He was
seated, his eyes were open. His nose seemed enormous, his unshaved beard,
still black, covered his face, up to the cheekbones, like an overgrown plant.
Stefano, seeing his brother-in-law, forgot his health and had a real fit of rage.
He shouted insults at the corpse, he wanted to kick it. You were a shit as a boy
—he screamed—and a shit you’ve remained. You deserve this death, you died
like a shit. He was angry because he had ruined his sister Pinuccia, because he
had ruined his nephews, and because he had ruined his son. Look, he said to
Gennaro, look what’s waiting for you. Gennaro grabbed him from behind and
gripped him hard to restrain him while, kicking and thrashing, Stefano tried to
get free.
It was early morning but already starting to get hot. The car stank of shit
and pee, the seats were broken, the windows so dirty you couldn’t see out.
Since Stefano continued to struggle and howl, the boy lost his temper and said
ugly things to his father. He said that it disgusted him to be his son, that the
only people in the whole neighborhood he respected were his mother and
Enzo. At that point Stefano began to cry. They sat together for a while beside
Rino’s body, not to watch over him, only to calm down. They went home to
deliver the news.
8.
Nunzia and Fernando were the only ones who felt the loss of Rino. Pinuccia
mourned her husband only as much as was indispensable and then seemed to
be reborn. Two weeks afterward she showed up at my house to ask if she could
replace  her  mother-in-law,  who  was  crushed  by  grief  and  didn’t  feel  like
working  anymore:  she  would  clean  the  house,  cook,  and  take  care  of  my
daughters in my absence for exactly the same sum. She was less efficient than
Nunzia but more talkative and above all more appealing to Dede, Elsa, and
Imma. She was full of compliments for all three of them and for me as well.
How well you look, she said, you’re a lady: I see you’ve got beautiful dresses
and a lot of shoes in the closet, it’s obvious that you’re important and you go
out with important people: is it true that they’re making a film out of your
book?
At first she acted like a widow, but then she asked if there were dresses I
didn’t wear anymore, even if she was large and they didn’t fit her. I’ll let them
out,  she  said,  and  I  chose  some  for  her.  She  altered  them  carefully  and
skillfully,  and  then  she  appeared  at  work  as  if  she  were  going  to  a  party,
parading back and forth along the hall so that the girls and I could give her our
opinion. She was very grateful to me; at times she was so content that she
wanted to talk rather than work, and she recalled the days of Ischia. She often
alluded  to  Bruno  Soccavo,  becoming  emotional,  and  saying  in  a  low  voice:
What a terrible end he had. A few times she made a remark that must have
pleased her greatly: I was widowed twice. One morning she confided to me that
Rino had been a real husband only for a few years, otherwise he had behaved
like a boy: even in bed, one minute and off he got, sometimes not even the
minute. Ah, yes, he was immature, he was a braggart, a liar, but also arrogant,
arrogant like Lina. It’s a characteristic of the race of the Cerullos—she grew
angry—they’re bigmouths and they’ve got no feelings. Then she began to speak
ill of Lila, she said she had appropriated everything that was a product of her
brother’s intelligence and hard work. I replied: It’s not true, Lina loved Rino, it
was he who exploited her in every way. Pinuccia looked at me bitterly, out of
the blue she began to praise her husband. Cerullo shoes, she pronounced, he
invented, but then Lina took advantage, she cheated Stefano, she made him
marry her, she stole a lot of money—Papa had left us millionaires—and then
she made a deal with Michele Solara, she ruined us all. She added: Don’t defend
her, you know it perfectly well.
It wasn’t true, naturally, I knew something quite different, Pinuccia spoke
like that because of old resentments. And yet Lila’s only real reaction to the
death of her brother was that she confirmed many of those lies. I had long
since  realized  that  each  of  us  organizes  memory  as  it  suits  him,  I’m  still
surprised when I do it myself. But it surprised me that one could go so far as to
give the facts an arrangement that went against one’s own interests. Lila began
almost immediately to attribute to Rino all the merits of the business with the
shoes. She said that her brother had had extraordinary imagination and skill
since  he  was  a  boy,  that  if  the  Solaras  hadn’t  interfered  he  might  have
surpassed Ferragamo. She strove to stop the flow of Rino’s life at the exact
moment when her father’s workshop was transformed into a small factory, and
from  all  the  rest—everything  that  he  had  done  and  had  done  to  her—she
removed shape and form. She kept alive and solid only the figure of the boy
who  had  defended  her  against  a  violent  father,  who  had  indulged  the
yearnings of a girl who sought outlets for her own intelligence.
This must have seemed to her a good remedy for grief, because in that same
period she revived, and she began to do the same thing with Tina. She no
longer spent her days as if the child might return at any moment, but tried to
fill the void in the house and in herself with a luminous little figure, as if it
were the product of a computer program. Tina became a sort of hologram, she
was  there  and  not  there.  Lila  called  her  up  rather  than  recalling  her.  She
showed me the photos in which she looked best or made me listen to her voice
that Enzo had recorded on a tape recorder at one year, at two, at three, or
quoted her funny little questions, her extraordinary answers, taking care to
speak of her always in the present: Tina has, Tina does, Tina says.
This didn’t soothe her, naturally, in fact she yelled more than before. She
yelled at her son, at her clients, at me, at Pinuccia, at Dede and Elsa, sometimes
at Imma. She yelled at Enzo, in particular, if, while he was working, he burst
into tears. But sometimes she sat down, as she had done in the first days, and
talked to Imma about Rino and about the child, as if for some reason they had
left together. If the little girl asked, when are they coming back, she answered
without getting angry: They’ll come back when they feel like it. But this, too,
became less frequent. After our fight about my daughters she didn’t seem to
need Imma anymore. In fact, she gradually reduced Imma’s visits, and, though
with more affection, began to treat her like her sisters. One evening when we
had  just  come  into  the  shabby  entranceway  of  our  building—and  Elsa
complained because she had seen a cockroach, and Dede at the mere idea was
disgusted, and Imma wanted me to pick her up—Lila said to all three, as if I
weren’t  present:  You’re  the  daughters  of  a  lady,  what  are  you  doing  here,
persuade your mother to take you away.
9.
Apparently, then, after Rino’s death she seemed to improve. She stopped
narrowing her eyes in alarm. The skin of her face, which seemed a pure white
canvas  sail  flattened  by  a  strong  wind,  softened.  But  it  was  a  momentary
improvement. Soon there was a jumble of wrinkles, on her forehead, at the
edges of her eyes, even on her cheeks, where they looked like fake pleats. And
her whole body began to age, her back was bent, her stomach swelled.
Carmen one day used an expression of her own, she said anxiously: Tina is
encysted in her, we have to get her out. And she was right, we had to find a
way to flush out the story of the child. But Lila refused, everything about her
daughter was fixed. I think that something shifted, very painfully, only with
Antonio and with Enzo but, out of necessity, in secret. And when suddenly
Antonio left—without saying goodbye to anyone, taking his blond family and
crazy Melina, now old—she no longer had even the mysterious reports he gave
her. She was left alone to rage at Enzo and Gennaro, often setting one against
the other. Or distracted, with her own thoughts, as if she were waiting.
I stopped by every day, even when I was pressed by deadlines, and did all I
could to revive our intimacy. Since she was always idle, I asked her once: “Do
you still like your work?”
“I never liked it.”
“You’re lying, I remember you liked it.”
“No, you don’t remember anything: Enzo liked it and so I made myself like
it.”
“Then find something else to do.”
“I’m fine like this. Enzo’s head is in the clouds and if I don’t help we’ll go out
of business.”
“You both need to emerge from your suffering.”
“What suffering, Lenù, we have to emerge from our rage.”
“Then emerge from rage.”
“We’re trying.”
“Try with more conviction. Tina doesn’t deserve it.”
“Forget Tina, think about your own daughters.”
“I am thinking about them.”
“Not enough.”
She always found, in those years, cracks through which to turn a situation
upside down and force me to look at the flaws of Dede, of Elsa, of Imma. You
neglect them, she said. I accepted the criticisms, some were well-founded, I too
often pursued my own life, neglecting theirs. But meanwhile I waited for an
opportunity to shift the conversation back to her and Tina. At a certain point, I
began to harass her about her pasty complexion.
“You’re very pale.”
“You’re too red: look, you’re purple.”
“I’m talking about you: what’s wrong?”
“Anemia.”
“What anemia.”
“My period comes when it likes, but then it doesn’t go away.”
“Since when?”
“Forever.”
“Tell the truth, Lila.”
“The truth.”
I pressed her, often I provoked her, and she reacted but never to the point of
losing control and letting go.
It  occurred  to  me  that  it  was  now  a  linguistic  question.  She  resorted  to
Italian as if to a barrier; I tried to push her toward dialect, our language of
candor.  But  while  her  Italian  was  translated  from  dialect,  my  dialect  was
increasingly translated from Italian, and we both spoke a false language. She
needed  to  explode,  lose  control  of  the  words.  I  wanted  her  to  say  in  the
authentic Neapolitan of our childhood: What the fuck do you want, Lenù, I’m
like this because I lost my daughter, and maybe she’s alive, maybe she’s dead,
but I can’t bear either of those possibilities, because if she’s alive she’s alive far
away from me, she’s in a place where horrible things are happening to her,
which I see clearly, I see them all day and all night as if they were happening
right before my eyes; but if she’s dead I’m dead, too, dead here inside, a death
more unbearable than real death, which is death without feeling, while this
death forces you to feel everything, every day, to wake up, wash, dress, eat and
drink, work, talk to you who don’t understand or won’t understand, to you
who  even  if  I  just  see  you,  all  set,  fresh  from  the  hairdresser,  with  your
daughters who do well in school, who always do everything perfectly, who
aren’t spoiled even by this place of shit, which, rather, seems to do them good
—makes them even more confident, even more arrogant, even more sure they
have  the  right  to  take  everything—all  this  makes  me  more  furious  than  I
already was: so go, go, leave me in peace, Tina would have been better than all
of you, and instead they took her, and I can’t bear it anymore.
I  would  have  liked  to  lead  her  into  a  conversation  like  that,  jumbled,
intoxicated. I felt that if she made up her mind she would extract from the
tangled mass of her brain words of that sort. But it didn’t happen. In fact, as I
think back, in that phase she was less aggressive than in other periods of our
story. Maybe the outburst I hoped for was made up of my own feelings, which
therefore hindered me from seeing the situation clearly and made Lila even
more  elusive.  Sometimes  I  wondered  if  she  had  in  her  mind  something
unutterable that I wasn’t even capable of imagining.
10.
Sundays were the worst. Lila stayed home, she didn’t work, and from outside
came the holiday voices. I went down, I said: Let’s go out, let’s take a walk to
the center, let’s go to the sea. She refused, and got angry if I was too insistent.
So,  to  make  up  for  her  rudeness,  Enzo  said:  I’ll  go,  come  on.  She  shouted
immediately: Yes, go, leave me in peace, I’ll take a bath and wash my hair, let
me breathe.
We would go out, my daughters came with us and sometimes also Gennaro—
who, after the death of his uncle, we all called Rino. During those hours of our
walks Enzo confided in me, in his laconic, sometimes obscure way. He said that
without Tina he didn’t know what the point of making money was. He said that
stealing children to make their parents suffer was a sign of the wretched times
that were coming. He said that after the birth of his daughter it was as if a light
had switched on in his head, and now the light had gone out. He said: You
remember when right here, on this street, I carried her on my shoulders? He
said: Thank you, Lenù, for the help you give us, don’t be angry with Lina, this is
a time of tribulation, but you know her better than I do, sooner or later she’ll
recover.
I listened, I asked him: She’s very pale, physically how is she? I meant: I
know she is tortured by grief, but tell me, is she healthy, have you noticed
worrying symptoms? But in the face of “physically” Enzo was embarrassed. He
knew almost nothing about Lila’s body, he adored it as one adores an idol,
warily and with respect. And he answered without conviction: fine. Then he
grew nervous, he was in a hurry to get home, he said: Let’s try to persuade her
at least to take a short walk in the neighborhood.
Useless. Only very rarely could I get Lila outside on a Sunday. But it wasn’t a
good  idea.  She  walked  quickly,  carelessly  dressed,  her  hair  loose  and
disheveled,  flashing  angry  glances.  My  daughters  and  I  followed  haltingly
behind her, supportive, like handmaidens more beautiful, more richly adorned
than our mistress. Everyone knew her, even the peddlers, who remembered
the troubles they had had because of Tina’s disappearance and, afraid there
could be others, avoided her. To everyone she was the terrifying woman who,
stricken  by  a  great  misfortune,  carried  its  potency  with  her,  spreading  it
wherever she went. Lila walked along the stradone with her fierce gaze, toward
the gardens, and people lowered their eyes, looked in another direction. But
even if someone greeted her she paid no attention, and didn’t respond. From
the way she walked she seemed to have an urgent goal. The truth is, she was
running from the memory of that Sunday two years earlier.
When  we  went  out  together  we  inevitably  met  the  Solaras.  Lately,  they
hadn’t been straying from the neighborhood much; there had been a lengthy
list of people murdered in Naples, and, at least on Sundays, they preferred to
remain peacefully on the streets of their childhood that for them were as safe
as a fortress. The two families always did the same things. They went to Mass,
they walked amid the stalls, they brought their children to the neighborhood
library, which by long tradition, since the days when Lila and I were young,
was open on Sundays. I thought it must be Elisa or Gigliola who imposed that
educated ritual, but once when I stopped to exchange a few words I discovered
that it was Michele. He said, pointing to his children, who although they were
grown obeyed him, evidently out of fear, while they had no respect for their
mother:
“They know that if they don’t read at least one book a month from the first
page to the last I won’t give them a lira. I’m doing the right thing, no, Lenù?”
I don’t know if they really took out books, they had enough money to buy
the entire Biblioteca Nazionale. But whether they did it out of real need or as a
performance, they now had this habit: they went up the stairs, pushed open
the glass door, a relic of the forties, went in, stayed for no more than ten
minutes, and came out.
When I was alone with my daughters, Marcello, Michele, Gigliola, and the
boys, too, were cordial; only my sister was cool. With Lila, on the other hand,
things  were  complicated,  and  I  was  afraid  that  the  tension  would  rise
dangerously. But on those very rare Sunday walks she always pretended that
they didn’t exist. And the Solaras behaved the same way, and since I was with
Lila they preferred to ignore me as well. Elsa, however, one Sunday morning,
decided  not  to  follow  that  unwritten  rule  and  with  her  queen-of-hearts
manners greeted the children of Michele and Gigliola, who responded uneasily.
As a result, although it was very cold, we were forced to stop for a few minutes.
The two Solaras pretended to have urgent things to talk about with each other,
I  spoke  to  Gigliola,  the  girls  to  the  boys,  Imma  studied  her  cousin  Silvio
attentively, since we saw him so infrequently. No one addressed a word to Lila,
and  Lila,  for  her  part,  was  silent.  Only  Michele,  when  he  broke  off  his
conversation with his brother and spoke to me in his teasing way, referred to
her without looking at her:
“Now, Lenù, we’re going to look in at the library and then we’re going to eat.
Would you like to come with us?”
“No, thank you,” I said, “we have to go. Another time, though, certainly.”
“Good, then tell the boys what they should read and what they shouldn’t.
You are an example for us, you and your daughters. When we see you pass by
on the street we always say: once Lenuccia was like us, and look how she is
now. She doesn’t know what pride is, she is democratic, she lives here with us,
just like us, even though she’s an important person. Ah, yes, those who study
become good. Today everyone goes to school, everyone keeps his eyes on the
books, and so in the future we’ll have so much of that goodness it’ll be coming
out  of  our  ears.  But  if  you  don’t  read  and  you  don’t  study,  which  is  what
happened to Lina, it happened to all of us, you stay malicious, and malice is
ugly. Isn’t it true, Lenù?”
He grabbed me by the wrist, his eyes were shining. He repeated sarcastically:
Isn’t it true? and I nodded yes, but I freed my wrist too forcefully, my mother’s
bracelet remained in his hand.
“Oh,” he exclaimed, and this time he sought Lila’s gaze, but didn’t find it. He
said with feigned regret: “I’m sorry, I’ll have it fixed for you.”
“It’s nothing.”
“Absolutely not, it’s my duty: you’ll have it back like new. Marcè, you’ll go by
the jeweler’s?”
Marcello nodded yes.
People were passing, eyes lowered; it was almost time for lunch. When we
managed to get rid of the brothers Lila said to me:
“You’re even more defenseless than you used to be: you’ll never see that
bracelet again.”
11.
I was convinced that she was about to have one of her crises. I saw that she
was debilitated and anguished, as if she expected something uncontrollable to
break the building in two, the apartment, herself. For several days, knocked
out by the flu, I didn’t hear anything about her. Dede, too, had a cough and a
fever, and I assumed that the virus would soon be transmitted to Elsa and to
Imma.  Also,  I  had  an  article  to  hand  in  urgently  (I  was  supposed  to  do
something  for  a  magazine  that  was  devoting  an  entire  issue  to  the  female
body) and I didn’t have the desire or the strength to write.
Outside a cold wind had arisen; it shook the windowpanes, blades of cold
penetrated the loose frames. On Friday Enzo came to tell me that he had to go
to Avellino because an old aunt of his was ill. As for Rino, he would be spending
Saturday and Sunday with Stefano, who had asked him to help dismantle the
fixtures in the grocery and take them to a man who was willing to buy them.
Lila therefore would be alone, and Enzo said that she was a little depressed, he
wanted me to keep her company. But I was tired, I barely had time to focus on
a thought when Dede called me, Imma wanted me, Elsa protested, and the
thought vanished. When Pinuccia came to clean the house I asked her to cook
enough for Saturday and Sunday, then I shut myself in my bedroom, where I
had a table to work at.
The next day, since I hadn’t heard from Lila, I went down to invite her to
lunch.  She  came  to  the  door  in  sandals,  an  old  green  bathrobe  over  her
pajamas, her hair disheveled. But to my amazement her eyes and mouth were
heavily made up. The house was a mess, and there was an unpleasant smell.
She said: If the wind blows any harder the neighborhood will fly away. Nothing
but an overused hyperbole and yet I was alarmed: she had said it as if she were
convinced that the neighborhood really could be torn from its foundations and
carried off to shatter near Ponti Rossi. Once she realized that I had perceived
how odd her tone was, she smiled in a forced way, whispered: I was joking. I
nodded, I listed the good things there were for lunch. She became excited in an
exaggerated way, but a moment later her mood abruptly changed, she said:
Bring me lunch here, I don’t want to come to your house, your daughters get
on my nerves.
I brought her lunch and also dinner. The stairs were cold, I didn’t feel well,
and I didn’t want to go up and down just to have unpleasant things said to me.
But this time I found her surprisingly cordial, she said Wait, sit with me for a
moment. She drew me into the bathroom, she brushed her hair carefully, and
meanwhile spoke about my daughters with tenderness, with admiration, as if
to  convince  me  that  she  didn’t  seriously  believe  what  she  had  said  to  me
earlier.
“At first,” she said, dividing the hair into two, and beginning to braid it
without losing sight of her image in the mirror, “Dede resembled you, now
instead she’s becoming like her father. The opposite is happening with Elsa:
she seemed identical to her father and now instead she’s starting to look like
you. Everything moves. A wish, a fantasy travels more swiftly than blood.”
“I don’t understand.”
“You remember when I thought Gennaro was Nino’s?”
“Yes.”
“To me he really seemed so, he was identical to Nino, his exact image.”
“You mean that a desire can be so strong as to seem fulfilled?”
“No, I mean that for a few years Gennaro was truly Nino’s child.”
“Don’t exaggerate.”
She  stared  at  me  spitefully  for  a  moment,  she  took  a  few  steps  in  the
bathroom, limping, she burst out laughing in a slightly artificial way.
“So it seems to you that I’m exaggerating?”
I realized with some annoyance that she was imitating my walk.
“Don’t make fun of me, my hip hurts.”
“Nothing  hurts,  Lenù.  You  invented  that  limp  in  order  not  to  let  your
mother die completely, and now you really do limp, and I’ve studied you, it’s
good for you. The Solaras took your bracelet and you said nothing, you weren’t
sorry, you weren’t worried. At the time I thought it was because you don’t
know  how  to  rebel,  but  now  I  understand  it’s  not  that.  You’re  getting  old
properly. You feel strong, you stopped being a daughter, you truly became a
mother.”
I felt uneasy, I repeated:
“It’s just a little pain.”
“Even  pain  does  you  good.  You  just  needed  a  slight  limp  and  now  your
mother stays quietly inside you. Her leg is glad that you limp and so you, too,
are glad. Isn’t that true?”
“No.”
She gave me an ironic look to reassert that she didn’t believe me, and with
her made-up eyes narrowed to cracks said: “Do you think that when Tina is
forty-two, she’ll be like this?”
I stared at her. She had a provocative expression, her hands tight around the
braids. I said: “It’s likely, yes, maybe so.”
12.
My daughters had to fend for themselves, I stayed to eat with Lila, even
though  I  felt  cold  in  my  bones.  We  talked  the  whole  time  about  physical
resemblances; I tried to understand what was happening in her mind. But I also
mentioned to her the work I was doing. Talking to you helps, I said to give her
confidence, you make me think.
The idea seemed to cheer her, she said: Knowing I’m useful to you I feel
better. Right afterward, thanks to the effort involved in being useful to me, she
moved on to contorted or illogical arguments. She had put on a lot of powder
to hide her pallor, and she didn’t seem herself but a Carnival mask with very
red cheeks. At times I followed her with interest, at times I recognized only the
signs of the illness that I was well acquainted with by now, and was alarmed.
For example, she said, laughing: For a while I brought up Nino’s child, just as
you’ve done with Imma, a flesh and blood child; but when that child became
Stefano’s where did Nino’s child go, does Gennaro still have him inside, do I
have him? Remarks like that: she got lost. Then she started abruptly to praise
my cooking, she said she had eaten with pleasure, something she hadn’t done
for a long time. When I said it wasn’t mine but Pinuccia’s, she darkened, she
grumbled that she didn’t want anything from Pinuccia. At that point Elsa called
me from the landing, she shouted that I had to come home right away, Dede
with  a  fever  was  even  worse  than  Dede  healthy.  I  urged  Lila  to  call  me
whenever she needed me, I told her to rest, I hurried up to my apartment.
For the rest of the day I tried to forget about her; I worked late into the
night. The children had grown up with the idea that when I really had my back
to the wall they had to look after themselves and not disturb me. In fact they
left me in peace, and I worked well. As usual a half sentence of Lila’s was
enough  and  my  brain  recognized  her  aura,  became  active,  liberated  my
intelligence. By now I knew that I could do well especially when she, even just
with a few disjointed words, assured the more insecure part of me that I was
right. I gave to her digressive complaints a concise, elegant organization. I
wrote  about  my  hip,  about  my  mother.  Now  that  I  was  surrounded  by
admiration, I could admit without uneasiness that talking to her incited ideas,
pushed  me  to  make  connections  between  distant  things.  In  those  years  of
being neighbors, I on the floor above, she below, it often happened. A slight
push was enough and the seemingly empty mind discovered that it was full
and lively. I attributed to her a sort of farsightedness, as I had all our lives, and
I found nothing wrong with it. I said to myself that to be adult was to recognize
that I needed her impulses. If once I had hidden, even from myself, that spark
she  induced  in  me,  now  I  was  proud  of  it,  I  had  even  written  about  it
somewhere. I was I and for that very reason I could make space for her in me
and give her an enduring form. She instead didn’t want to be her, so she couldn’t
do the same. The tragedy of Tina, her weakened physical state, her drifting
brain surely contributed to her crises. But that was the underlying cause of the
illness that she called “dissolving boundaries.” I went to bed around three, I
woke at nine.
Dede’s  fever  was  gone,  but  in  compensation  Imma  had  a  cough.  I
straightened the apartment, I went to see how Lila was. I knocked for a long
time, she didn’t open the door. I pressed the bell until I heard her dragging
footsteps  and  her  voice  grumbling  insults  in  dialect.  Her  braids  were  half
undone, her makeup was smeared, even more than the day before it was a
mask with a pained expression.
“Pinuccia  poisoned  me,”  she  said  with  conviction.  “I  couldn’t  sleep,  my
stomach is splitting.”
I went in, I had an impression of carelessness, of filth. On the floor, next to
the sink, I saw toilet paper soaked with blood. I said: “I ate the same things you
ate and I’m fine.”
“Then explain to me what’s wrong with me.”
“Menstruation?”
She got mad:
“I’m always menstruating.”
“Then you should be examined.”
“I’m not going to have my stomach examined by anyone.”
“What do you think is wrong?”
“I know what it is.”
“I’ll go get you a painkiller at the pharmacy.”
“You must have something in the house?”
“I don’t need them.”
“And Dede and Elsa?”
“They don’t, either.”
“Ah, you’re perfect, you never need anything.”
I was irked, it was starting up again.
“You want to quarrel?”
“You want to quarrel, since you say I have menstrual cramps. I’m not a child
like your daughters, I know if I have that pain or something else.”
It  wasn’t  true,  she  knew  nothing  about  herself.  When  it  came  to  the
workings of her body she was worse than Dede and Elsa. I realized that she was
suffering,  she  pressed  her  stomach  with  her  hands.  Maybe  I  was  wrong:
certainly she was overwhelmed with anguish, but not because of her old fears
—she really was ill. I made her some chamomile tea, forced her to drink it. I put
on a coat and went to see if the pharmacy was open. Gino’s father was a skilled
pharmacist, he would surely give me good advice. But I had barely emerged
onto the stradone, among the Sunday stalls, when I heard explosions—pah, pah,
pah,  pah—similar  to  the  sound  of  the  firecrackers  that  children  set  off  at
Christmastime. There were four close together, then came a fifth: pah.
I  turned  onto  the  street  where  the  pharmacy  was.  People  seemed
disoriented, Christmas was still weeks away, some walked quickly, some ran.
Suddenly  the  litany  of  sirens  began:  the  police,  an  ambulance.  I  asked
someone  what  had  happened,  he  shook  his  head,  he  admonished  his  wife
because she was slow and hurried off. Then I saw Carmen with her husband
and two children. They were on the other side of the street, I crossed. Before I
could ask a question Carmen said in dialect: They’ve killed both Solaras.
13.
There are moments when what exists on the edges of our lives, and which, it
seems, will be in the background forever—an empire, a political party, a faith, a
monument, but also simply the people who are part of our daily existence—
collapses in an utterly unexpected way, and right when countless other things
are pressing upon us. This period was like that. Day after day, month after
month, task was added to task, tremor to tremor. For a long time it seemed to
me that I was like certain figures in novels and paintings who stand firm on a
cliff or on the prow of a ship in the face of a storm, which doesn’t overwhelm
them and in fact doesn’t even touch them. My telephone rang continuously.
The fact that I lived in the dominion of the Solaras compelled me to an infinite
chain of words, written and spoken. After the death of her husband, my sister
Elisa became a terrified child, she wanted me with her day and night, she was
sure that the murderers would return to kill her and her son. And above all I
had  to  tend  to  Lila,  who  that  same  Sunday  was  suddenly  torn  from  the
neighborhood, from her son, from Enzo, from her job, and ended up in the
hands of the doctors, because she was weak, she saw things that seemed real
but weren’t, she was losing blood. They discovered a fibromatous uterus, they
operated  and  took  it  out.  Once—she  was  still  in  the  hospital—she  woke
suddenly, exclaimed that Tina had come out of her belly again and now was
taking revenge on everyone, even on her. For a fraction of a second she was
sure that the killer of the Solaras was her daughter.
14.
Marcello and Michele died on a Sunday in December of 1986, in front of the
church where they had been baptized. Just a few minutes after their murder
the  whole  neighborhood  knew  the  details.  Michele  had  been  shot  twice,
Marcello  three  times.  Gigliola  had  run  away,  her  sons  had  instinctively
followed her. Elisa had grabbed Silvio and held him tight, turning her back on
the murderers. Michele had died immediately, Marcello, no, he had sat down
on a step and tried to button his jacket, but couldn’t.
When it came to saying who had actually killed the Solara brothers, those
who appeared to know everything about the murders realized they had seen
almost nothing. It was a single man who fired the shots, then had got calmly
into a red Ford Fiesta and left. No, there had been two, two men, and at the
wheel of the yellow Fiat 147 in which they escaped there was a woman. Not at
all, the murderers were three, men, faces covered by ski masks, and they had
fled on foot. In some cases it seemed that no one had fired the shots. In the
story Carmen told me, for example, the Solaras, my sister, my nephew, Gigliola,
her children became agitated in front of the church as if they had been hit by
effects without cause: Michele fell to the ground backward and hit his head
hard on the lava stone; Marcello sat down cautiously on a step and since he
couldn’t close his jacket over the blue turtleneck sweater he cursed and lay
down on one side; the wives, the children hadn’t got even a scratch and in a
few seconds had gone into the church to hide. It seemed that those present had
looked only in the direction of the killed and not that of the killers.
Armando,  in  this  situation,  returned  to  interview  me  for  his  television
station.  He  wasn’t  the  only  one.  At  that  moment  I  said,  and  recounted  in
writing, in various places, what I knew. But in the two or three days that
followed I realized that in particular the reporters for the Neapolitan papers
knew much more than I did. Information that until not long before could be
found  nowhere  was  suddenly  flooding  in.  An  impressive  list  of  criminal
enterprises I had never heard of were attributed to the Solara brothers. Equally
impressive was the list of their assets. What I had written with Lila, what I had
published  when  they  were  still  alive  was  nothing,  almost  nothing  in
comparison with what appeared in the papers after their death. On the other
hand I realized that I knew other things, things that no one knew and no one
wrote, not even me. I knew that the Solaras had always seemed very handsome
to us as girls, that they went around the neighborhood in their Fiat 1100 like
ancient  warriors  in  their  chariots,  that  one  night  they  had  defended  us  in
Piazza dei Martiri from the wealthy youths of Chiaia, that Marcello would have
liked to marry Lila but then had married my sister Elisa, that Michele had
understood the extraordinary qualities of my friend long before that and had
loved her for years in a way so absolute that he had ended up losing himself.
Just  as  I  realized  that  I  knew  these  things  I  discovered  that  they  were
important. They indicated how I and countless other respectable people all
over Naples had been within the world of the Solaras, we had taken part in the
opening of their businesses, had bought pastries at their bar, had celebrated
their marriages, had bought their shoes, had been guests in their houses, had
eaten at  the same table,  had  directly or  indirectly taken  their  money,  had
suffered their violence and pretended it was nothing. Marcello and Michele
were, like it or not, part of us, just as Pasquale was. But while in relation to
Pasquale, even with innumerable distinctions, a clear line of separation could
immediately be drawn, the line of separation in relation to people like the
Solaras had been and was, in Naples, in Italy, vague. The farther we jumped
back in horror, the more certain it was that we were behind the line.
The concreteness that being behind the line assumed in the reduced and
overfamiliar space of the neighborhood depressed me. Someone, to sling mud
on me, wrote that I was related to the Solaras and for a while I avoided going to
see my sister and my nephew. I even avoided Lila. Of course, she had been the
brothers’ bitterest enemy, but hadn’t she gotten the money to start her little
business working for Michele, maybe stealing it from him? I wandered around
that theme for a while. Then time passed, the Solaras, too, joined the many
who every day ended up on the list of the murdered, and slowly what began to
worry us was only that people less familiar and more violent would take their
place. I forgot them to the point that when a teenage boy delivered a package
from a jeweler in Montesanto, I didn’t immediately guess what it contained.
The red case inside amazed me, the envelope addressed to Dottoressa Elena
Greco. I had to read the note to realize what it was. Marcello had, in a laborious
handwriting, written only “Sorry,” and had signed it with a swirling “M,” of
the type that used to be taught in elementary school. In the case was my
bracelet, so highly polished that it seemed new.
15.
When I told Lila about that package and showed her the polished bracelet
she said: Don’t wear it and don’t even let your daughters wear it. She had
returned home very weak; when she went up a flight of stairs you could hear
the breath straining in her chest. She took pills and gave herself injections, but
she was so pale that she seemed to have been in the kingdom of the dead and
spoke of the bracelet as if she were sure that it had come from there.
The death of the Solaras overlapped with her emergency admission to the
hospital, the blood she had shed was mixed—in my feeling of that chaotic
Sunday—with theirs. But whenever I tried to talk to her about that execution,
so to speak, in front of the church, she became irritated, she reacted with
remarks like: They were shits, Lenù, who gives a damn about them, I’m sorry
for your sister but if she had been a little smarter she wouldn’t have married
Marcello, everyone knows that people like him end up getting killed.
Sometimes I tried to draw her into the sense of contiguity that at that time
embarrassed me, I thought she should feel it more than I did. I said something
like:
“We’d known them since they were boys.”
“All men were once boys.”
“They gave you work.”
“It was convenient for them and it was convenient for me.”
“Michele was certainly a bastard but so were you sometimes.”
“I should have done worse.”
She made an effort to limit herself to contempt, but she had a malicious
look, she entwined her fingers and gripped them, making her knuckles turn
white. I saw that behind those words, fierce in themselves, there were even
fiercer ones that she avoided saying, but that she had ready in her mind. I read
them in her face, I heard them shouted: If it was the Solaras who took Tina
away from me, then too little was done to them, they should have been drawn
and quartered, their hearts ripped out, and their guts dumped on the street; if
it wasn’t them, whoever murdered them did a good thing just the same, they
deserved that and more; if the assassins had whistled I would have hurried to
give them a hand.
But she never expressed herself in that way. To all appearances the abrupt
exit from the scene of the two brothers seemed to have little effect on her.
Only it encouraged her to walk in the neighborhood more frequently, since
there  was  no  longer  any  chance  of  meeting  them.  She  never  mentioned
returning to the activities of the time before Tina’s disappearance, she never
resumed the life of home and office. She made her convalescence last for weeks
and weeks, as she wandered around the tunnel, the stradone, the gardens. She
walked with her head down, she spoke to no one, and since, partly because of
her neglected appearance, she continued to seem dangerous to herself and
others, no one spoke to her.
Sometimes she insisted that I go with her, and it was hard to say no. We
often  passed  the  bar-pastry  shop,  which  bore  a  sign  saying  “Closed  for
mourning.” The mourning never ended, the shop never reopened, the time of
the Solaras was over. But Lila glanced every time at the lowered shutters, the
faded sign, and said with satisfaction: It’s still closed. The fact seemed to her so
positive that, as we passed by, she might even give a small laugh, just a small
laugh, as if in that closure there was something ridiculous.
Only once did we stop at the corner as if to take in its ugliness, now that it
was without the old embellishments of the bar. Once, there had been tables
and colored chairs, the fragrance of pastries and coffee, the coming and going
of people, secret trafficking, honest deals and corrupt deals. Now there was the
chipped gray wall. When the grandfather died, Lila said, after their mother’s
murder, Marcello and Michele carpeted the neighborhood with crosses and
Madonnas, they made endless lamentations; now that they’re dead, zero. Then
she  remembered  when  she  was  still  in  the  clinic  and  I  had  told  her  that,
according to the reticent words of the people, the bullets that killed the Solaras
hadn’t been fired by anyone. No one killed them—she smiled—no one weeps
for them. And she stopped, and was silent for a few seconds. Then, without any
obvious connection, she told me that she didn’t want to work anymore.
16.
It didn’t seem like a random manifestation of a bad mood, surely she had
thought about it for a long time, maybe since she had left the clinic. She said:
“If Enzo can do it by himself, good, and if not we’ll sell it.”
“You want to give up Basic Sight? And what will you do?”
“Does a person necessarily have to do something?”
“You have to use your life.”
“The way you do?”
“Why not?”
She laughed, she sighed: “I want to waste time.”
“You have Gennaro, you have Enzo, you have to think of them.”
“Gennaro is twenty-three years old, I’ve been too taken up with him. And I
have to separate Enzo from me.”
“Why?”
“I want to go back to sleeping alone.”
“It’s terrible to sleep alone.”
“You do, don’t you?”
“I don’t have a man.”
“Why should I have one?”
“Aren’t you fond of Enzo anymore?”
“Yes, but I have no desire for him or anyone. I’m old and no one should
disturb me when I sleep.”
“Go to a doctor.”
“Enough with doctors.”
“I’ll go with you, those are problems that can be solved.”
She became serious.
“No, I’m fine like this.”
“No one is fine like this.”
“I am. Fucking is very overrated.”
“I’m talking about love.”
“I have other things on my mind. You’ve already forgotten Tina, not me.”
I heard Enzo and her arguing more frequently. Rather, in the case of Enzo,
only his heavy voice reached me, slightly more emphatic than usual, while Lila
did nothing but scream. Only a few phrases of his reached me upstairs, filtered
through the floor. He wasn’t angry—he was never angry with Lila—he was
desperate.  In  essence  he  said  that  everything  had  gotten  worse—Tina,  the
work,  their  relationship—but  she  wasn’t  doing  anything  to  redefine  the
situation; rather she wanted everything to continue getting worse. You talk to
us, he said to me once. I answered that it was no use, she just needed more
time to find an equilibrium. Enzo, for the first time, replied roughly: Lina has
never had any equilibrium.
It wasn’t true. Lila, when she wanted, could be calm, thoughtful, even in that
phase of great tension. She had good days, when she was serene and very
affectionate. She took care of me and my daughters, she asked about my trips,
about what I was writing, about the people I met. She followed—often with
amusement, sometimes with indignation—the stories Dede, Elsa, even Imma
told  about  school  failures,  crazy  teachers,  quarrels,  loves.  And  she  was
generous.  One  afternoon,  with  Gennaro’s  help,  she  brought  me  up  an  old
computer. She taught me how it worked and said: I’m giving it to you.
The next day I began writing on it. I got used to it quickly, even though I was
obsessed by the fear that a power outage would sweep away hours of work.
Otherwise  I  was  excited  about  the  machine.  I  told  my  daughters,  in  Lila’s
presence: Imagine, I learned to write with a fountain pen, then moved on to a
ballpoint pen, then the typewriter—and also an electric typewriter—and finally
here I am, I tap on the keys and this miraculous writing appears. It’s absolutely
beautiful, I’ll never go back, I’m finished with the pen, I’ll always write on the
computer, come, touch the callus I have here on my index finger, feel how hard
it is: I’ve always had it but now it will disappear.
Lila  enjoyed  my  satisfaction,  she  had  the  expression  of  someone  who  is
happy to have made a welcome gift. Your mother, however, she said, has the
enthusiasm of someone who understands nothing, and she drew them away to
let me work. Although she knew she had lost their confidence, when she was in
a good mood she often took them to the office to teach them what the newest
machines could do, and how and why. She said, to win them back: Signora
Elena Greco, I don’t know if you know her, has the attention of a hippopotamus
sleeping in a swamp, whereas you girls are very quick. But she couldn’t regain
their  affection,  in  particular  Dede  and  Elsa’s.  The  girls  said  to  me:  It’s
impossible to understand what she has in mind, Mamma, first she urges us to
learn and then she says that these machines are useful for making a lot of
money by destroying all the old ways of making money. Yet, while I knew how
to use the computer only for writing, my daughters, and even Imma to a small
extent, soon acquired knowledge and skills that made me proud. Whenever I
had a problem I began to depend especially on Elsa, who always knew what to
do and then boasted to Aunt Lina: I fixed it like this and like that, what do you
say, was I clever?
Things went even better when Dede began to involve Rino. He, who had
never even wanted to touch one of those objects of Enzo and Lila’s, began to
show some interest, if only not to be admonished by the girls. One morning Lila
said to me, laughing: “Dede is changing Gennaro.”
I answered:
“Rino just needs some confidence.”
She replied with ostentatious vulgarity: “I know what kind of confidence he
needs.”
17.
Those were the good days. But soon the bad ones arrived: she was hot, she
was cold, she turned yellow, then she flared up, she yelled, she demanded, she
broke out in a sweat, then she quarreled with Carmen, whom she called stupid
and  whiny.  After  the  operation  her  body  seemed  even  more  confused.
Suddenly  she  put  an  end  to  the  kindnesses;  she  found  Elsa  unbearable,
reprimanded  Dede,  treated  Imma  harshly;  while  I  was  speaking  to  her  she
abruptly turned her back and went off. In those dark periods she couldn’t
stand to be in the house and had even less tolerance for the office. She took a
bus or the subway and off she went.
“What are you doing?” I asked.
“I’m traveling around Naples.”
“Yes, but where?”
“Do I have to account for myself to you?”
Any  occasion  could  provide  a  pretext  for  a  fight;  it  took  nothing.  She
quarreled mainly with her son but ascribed the cause of their disagreements to
Dede and Elsa. In fact she was right. My oldest daughter happily spent time
with Rino, and now her sister, in order not to feel excluded, made an effort to
accept  him,  and  was  often  with  them.  The  result  was  that  both  were
inoculating him with a sort of permanent insubordination, an attitude that,
while in their case was only a passionate verbal exercise, for Rino became
confused and self-indulgent chatter that Lila couldn’t bear. Those two girls, she
scolded her son, put intelligence into it, you repeat nonsense like a parrot. In
those days she was intolerant, she wouldn’t accept clichéd phrases, maudlin
expressions, any form of sentimentality, or, especially, the spirit of rebellion
fed by old slogans. And yet at the opportune moment she herself displayed an
affected anarchism that to me seemed out of place now. We confronted each
other harshly when, at the approach of the electoral campaign of ’87, we read
that Nadia Galiani had been arrested in Chiasso.
Carmen hurried to my house in the grip of a panic attack, she couldn’t think,
she said: Now they’ll seize Pasquale, you’ll see, he escaped the Solaras but the
carabinieri will murder him. Lila answered: The carabinieri didn’t arrest Nadia,
she turned herself in to bargain for a lighter sentence. That hypothesis seemed
sensible to me. There were a few lines in the papers, but no talk of pursuits,
shooting, capture. To soothe Carmen I again advised her: Pasquale would do
well to turn himself in, you know what I think. All hell broke loose, Lila became
furious, she began to shout: “Turn himself over to whom.”
“To the state.”
“To the state?”
She made a concise list of thefts and criminal collaborations old and new by
ministers,  simple  parliamentarians,  policemen,  judges,  secret  services  from
1945 until then, showing herself as usual more informed than I could have
imagined. And she yelled: “That is the state, why the fuck do you want to give it
Pasquale?” Then she pushed me: “Let’s bet that Nadia does a few months in jail
and comes out, while, if they get Pasquale, they’ll lock him in a cell and throw
away the key?” She was almost on top of me, repeating aggressively: “Do you
want to bet?”
I didn’t answer. I was worried, this sort of conversation wasn’t good for
Carmen. After the death of the Solaras she had immediately withdrawn the
lawsuit against me, she had done endless nice things for me, she was always
available  to  my  daughters,  even  if  she  was  burdened  by  obligations  and
worries. I was sorry that instead of soothing her we were tormenting her. She
was trembling, she said, addressing me but invoking Lila’s authority: If Nadia
turned herself in, Lenù, it means that she’s repented, that now she’s throwing
all the blame on Pasquale and will get herself off. Isn’t it true, Lina? But then
she spoke bitterly to Lila, invoking my authority: It’s no longer a matter of
principle, Lina, we have to think of what’s right for Pasquale, we have to let
him know that it’s better to live in prison than to be killed: isn’t it true, Lenù?
At that point Lila insulted us grossly and, although we were in her house,
went out, slamming the door.
18.
For  Lila,  going  out,  wandering  around,  was  now  the  solution  to  all  the
tensions and problems she struggled with. Often she left in the morning and
returned in the evening, paying no attention to Enzo, who didn’t know how to
deal with the clients, or to Rino, or to the commitments she made to me, when
I had to travel and left her my daughters. She was now unreliable, all it took
was some small setback and she dropped everything, without a thought of the
consequences.
Carmen  maintained  that  Lila  took  refuge  in  the  old  cemetery  on  the
Doganella, where she chose the grave of a child to think about Tina, who had
no grave, and then she walked along the shaded paths, amid plants, old niches,
stopping in front of the most faded photographs. The dead—Carmen said to me
—are a certainty, they have stones, the dates of birth and death, while her
daughter doesn’t, her daughter will remain forever with only the date of birth,
and that is terrible, that poor child will never have a conclusion, a fixed point
where her mother can sit and be tranquil. But Carmen had a propensity for
fantasies about  death  and  so I  took  no  notice. I  imagined  that  Lila  walked
through the city paying no attention to anything, only to numb the grief that
after  years  continued  to  poison  her.  Or  I  hypothesized  that  she  really  had
decided,  in  her  way,  extreme  as  always,  not  to  devote  herself  anymore  to
anything  or  anyone.  And  since  I  knew  that  her  mind  needed  exactly  the
opposite, I feared that she would have a nervous breakdown, that at the first
opportunity she would let loose against Enzo, against Rino, against me, against
my daughters, against a passerby who annoyed her, against anyone who gave
her an extra glance. At home I could quarrel, calm her down, control her. But
on the street? Every time she went out I was afraid she’d get in trouble. But
frequently, when I had something to do and heard the door below close and
her steps on the stairs, then out in the street, I drew a sigh of relief. She
wouldn’t come up to me, she wouldn’t drop in with provocative words, she
wouldn’t taunt the girls, she wouldn’t disparage Imma, she wouldn’t try in
every possible way to hurt me.
I went back to thinking insistently that it was time to leave. Now it was
senseless for me, for Dede, for Elsa, for Imma to remain in the neighborhood.
Lila herself, besides, after her stay in the hospital, after the operation, after the
imbalances  of  her  body,  had  begun  to  say  more  often  what  she  first  said
sporadically: Go away, Lenù, what are you doing here, look at you, it’s as if
you’re staying only because you made a vow to the Madonna. She wanted to
remind  me  that  I  hadn’t  met  her  expectations,  that  my  living  in  the
neighborhood was only an intellectual pretense, that in fact for her, for the
place where we were born—with all my studies, with all my books—I had been
useless, I was useless. I was irritated and I thought: she treats me as if she
wanted to fire me for poor performance.
19.
A period began in which I racked my brains constantly over what to do. My
daughters needed stability and I had to work hard to get their fathers to attend
to them. Nino remained the bigger problem. Occasionally he telephoned, said
some sweet thing to Imma on the telephone, she responded in monosyllables,
that was it. Recently he had made a move that was, all in all, predictable,
considering  his  ambitions:  during  the  elections  he  had  appeared  on  the
socialist party lists. For the occasion he had sent me a letter in which he asked
me to vote for him and get people to vote. In the letter, which ended with Tell
Lina, too! he had enclosed a flyer that included an attractive photograph of him
and a biographical note. Underlined in pen was a line in which he declared to
the electors that he had three children: Albertino, Lidia, and Imma. Next to it
he had written: Please read this to the child.
I hadn’t voted and I had done nothing to get people to vote for him, but I had
shown the flyer to Imma and she had asked if she could keep it. When her
father  was  elected  I  explained  briefly  the  meaning  of  people,  elections,
representation,  parliament.  Now  he  lived  permanently  in  Rome.  After  his
electoral success he had been in touch only once, with a letter as hasty as it
was self-satisfied, which he asked me to read to his daughter, Dede, and Elsa.
No telephone number, no address, only words whose meaning was an offer of
protection at a distance (Be sure that I will watch over you). But Imma also wanted
to keep that testimony to her father’s existence. And when Elsa said to her
things like, You’re boring, that’s why you’re called Sarratore and we’re Airota,
she seemed less disoriented—perhaps less worried—by having a surname that
was different from that of her sisters. One day the teacher had asked her: Are
you  the  daughter  of  the  Honorable  Sarratore,  and  the  next  day  she  had
brought in as proof the flyer, which she kept for any eventuality. I was pleased
with that pride and planned to try to consolidate it. Nino’s life was, as usual,
crowded and turbulent? All right. But his daughter wasn’t a rosette to use and
then put back in the drawer until the next occasion.
With Pietro in recent years I had never had any problems. He contributed
money  for  his  daughters’  maintenance  punctually  (from  Nino  I  had  never
received a lira) and was as far as possible a conscientious father. But not long
ago he had broken up with Doriana, he was tired of Florence, he wanted to go
to  the  United  States.  And,  stubborn  as  he  was,  he  would  manage  it.  That
alarmed me. I said to him: You’ll abandon your daughters, and he replied: it
seems a desertion now but you’ll see, soon it will be an advantage for them
especially. He was probably right, in that his words had something in common
with Nino’s (Be sure that I will watch over you). In fact, however, Dede and Elsa,
too, would remain without a father. And if Imma had always done without,
Dede and Elsa clung to Pietro, they were used to having recourse to him when
they wanted. His departure would sadden and limit them, that I was sure of. Of
course they were old enough, Dede was eighteen, Elsa almost fifteen. They
were in good schools, they both had good teachers. But was it enough? They
had  never  become  assimilated,  neither  of  them  had  close  schoolmates  or
friends, they seemed comfortable only with Rino. And what did they really
have  in  common  with  that  large  boy  who  was  much  older  and  yet  more
childish than they?
No, I had to leave Naples. I could try to live in Rome, for example, and for
Imma’s sake resume relations with Nino, only on the level of friendship, of
course. Or return to Florence, so that Pietro could be closer to his daughters,
and thus would not move across the ocean. The decision seemed particularly
urgent when one night Lila came upstairs with a quarrelsome look, evidently
in a bad mood, and asked me: “Is it true that you told Dede to stop seeing
Gennaro?”
I was embarrassed. I had only explained to my daughter that she shouldn’t
be stuck to him all the time.
“See him—she can see him when she wants: I’m only afraid that Gennaro
might be annoyed, he’s grown-up, she’s a girl.”
“Lenù, be clear. You think my son isn’t good for your daughter?”
I stared at her in bewilderment.
“Good how?”
“You know perfectly well she’s in love.”
I burst out laughing.
“Dede? Rino?”
“Why, don’t you think it’s possible that your child has lost her head over
mine?”
20.
Until that moment I had paid little attention to the fact that Dede, unlike her
sister, who happily changed suitors every month, had never had a declared and
ostentatious passion. I had attributed that withdrawn attitude partly to the
fact that she didn’t feel pretty, partly to her rigor, and from time to time I had
teased her (Are all the boys in your school unappealing?). She was a girl who didn’t
forgive frivolity in anyone, above all in herself, but especially in me. The times
she had seen me, I wouldn’t say flirt but even just laugh with a man—or, I don’t
know, give a warm welcome to some boy who had brought her home—she
made  her  disapproval  clear  and  on  one  unpleasant  occasion  some  months
earlier had even gone so far as to use a vulgarity in dialect to me, which had
made me furious.
But maybe it wasn’t a question of a war on frivolity. After Lila’s words I
began to observe Dede and I realized that her protective attitude toward Lila’s
son could not be reduced, as I had thought until then, to a long childhood
affection  or  a  heated  adolescent  defense  of  the  humiliated  and  offended.  I
realized, rather, that her asceticism was the effect of an intense and exclusive
bond with Rino that had endured since early childhood. That frightened me. I
thought of the long duration of my love for Nino and I said to myself in alarm:
Dede is setting off on the same path, but with the aggravating factor that if
Nino  was  an  extraordinary  boy  and  had  become  a  handsome,  intelligent,
successful man, Rino is an insecure, uneducated youth, without attractions,
without any future, and, if I thought about it, more than Stefano he physically
recalled his grandfather, Don Achille.
I decided to speak to her. It was a few months until her final exams, she was
very busy, it would be easy for her to say to me: I’ve got a lot to do, let’s put it
off. But Dede wasn’t Elsa, who was able to reject me, who could pretend. With
my  oldest  daughter  it  was  enough  to  ask  and  I  was  sure  that  she,  at  any
moment, whatever she was doing, would answer with the greatest frankness. I
asked: “Are you in love with Rino?”
“Yes.”
“And he?”
“I don’t know.”
“Since when have you had that feeling?”
“Forever.”
“But if he doesn’t reciprocate?”
“My life would no longer have meaning.”
“What are you thinking of doing?”
“I’ll tell you after the exams.”
“Tell me now.”
“If he wants me we’ll go away.”
“Where?”
“I don’t know, but certainly away from here.”
“He also hates Naples?”
“Yes, he wants to go to Bologna.”
“Why?”
“It’s a place where there’s freedom.”
I looked at her with affection.
“Dede, you know that neither your father nor I will let you go.”
“There’s no need for you to let me go. I’m going and that’s it.”
“What about money?”
“I’ll work.”
“And your sisters? And me?”
“Some day or other, Mamma, we’ll have to separate anyway.”
I emerged from that conversation drained of strength. Although she had
presented unreasonable things in an orderly fashion, I tried to behave as if she
were saying very reasonable things.
Later, anxiously, I tried to think what to do. Dede was only an adolescent in
love, one way or another I would make her obey. The problem was Lila, I was
afraid of her, I knew immediately that the fight with her would be bitter. She
had lost Tina, Rino was her only child. She and Enzo had gotten him away from
drugs in time, using very harsh methods; she wouldn’t accept that I, too, would
cause him suffering. All the more since the company of my two daughters was
doing him good; he was even working a little with Enzo, and it was possible
that separating him from them would send him off the rails again. Besides, any
possible regression of Rino worried me, too. I was fond of him, he had been an
unhappy child and was an unhappy youth. Certainly he had always loved Dede,
certainly giving her up would be unbearable for him. But what to do. I became
more affectionate, I didn’t want any misunderstandings: I valued him, I would
always try to help him in everything, he had only to ask; but anyone could see
that he and Dede were very different and that any solution they came up with
would in a short time be disastrous. Thus I proceeded, and Rino became in turn
kinder, he fixed broken blinds, dripping faucets, with the three sisters acting as
helpers. But Lila didn’t appreciate her son’s availability. If he spent too much
time at our house she summoned him with an imperious cry.
21.
I didn’t confine myself to that strategy, I telephoned Pietro. He was about to
move to Boston; now he seemed determined. He was mad at Doriana, who—he
said with disgust—had turned out to be an untrustworthy person, completely
without  ethics.  Then  he  listened  to  me  attentively.  He  knew  Rino,  he
remembered him as a child and knew what he had become as an adult. He
asked a couple of times, to be sure of not making a mistake: He has no drug
problems? And once only: Does he work? Finally he said: It’s preposterous. We
agreed  that  between  the  two  of  them,  taking  account  of  our  daughter’s
sensitivity, even a flirtation had to be ruled out.
I was glad that we saw things the same way, I asked him to come to Naples
and talk to Dede. He promised he would, but he had endless commitments and
appeared only near Dede’s exams, in essence to say goodbye to his daughters
before leaving for America. We hadn’t seen each other for a long time. He had
his usual distracted expression. His hair was by now grizzled, his body had
become heavier. He hadn’t seen Lila and Enzo since Tina’s disappearance—
when he came to see the girls he would stay only a few hours or take them off
on a trip—and he devoted himself to them. Pietro was a kind man, careful not
to cause embarrassment with his role as a prestigious professor. He talked to
them at length, assuming that serious and sympathetic expression that I knew
well and that in the past had irritated me, but that today I appreciated because
it wasn’t feigned, and was natural also to Dede. I don’t know what he said about
Tina, but while Enzo remained impassive Lila cheered up, she thanked him for
his wonderful letter of years earlier, said it had helped her a lot. Only then did I
learn that Pietro had written to her about the loss of her daughter, and Lila’s
genuine gratitude surprised me. He was modest; she excluded Enzo from the
conversation  completely  and  began  to  speak  to  my  ex-husband  about
Neapolitan things. She dwelt at length on the Palazzo Cellamare, about which I
knew nothing except that it was above Chiaia, while she—I discovered then—
knew in minute detail the structure, the history, the treasures. Pietro listened
with interest. I fumed, I wanted him to stay with his daughters and, especially,
deal with Dede.
When Lila finally left him free and Pietro, after spending some time with
Elsa and Imma, found a way of going off with Dede, father and daughter talked
a lot, peacefully. I observed them from the window as they walked back and
forth along the stradone. It struck me, I think for the first time, how similar
they were physically. Dede didn’t have her father’s bushy hair but she had his
large frame and also something of his clumsy walk. She was a girl of eighteen,
she had a feminine softness, but at every gesture, every step, she seemed to
enter and exit Pietro’s body as if it were her ideal dwelling. I stayed at the
window hypnotized by the sight. The time extended, they talked so long that
Elsa and Imma began to get restless. I also have things to tell Papa, said Elsa,
and if he leaves when will I tell him? Imma murmured: He said he’d talk to me,
too.
Finally  Pietro  and  Dede  returned,  they  seemed  in  a  good  mood.  In  the
evening all three girls gathered around to listen to him. He said he was going
to work in a very big, very beautiful redbrick building that had a statue at the
entrance. The statue represented a man whose face and clothes were dark,
except for one shoe, which the students touched every day for good luck and
so it had become highly polished, and sparkled in the sun like gold. They had a
good time together, leaving me out. I thought, as always on those occasions:
now that he doesn’t have to be a father every day he’s a very good father, even
Imma adores him; maybe with men things can’t go otherwise: live with them
for a while, have children, and then they’re gone. The superficial ones, like
Nino, would go without feeling any type of obligation; the serious ones, like
Pietro, wouldn’t fail in any of their duties and would if necessary give the best
of themselves. Anyway, the time of faithfulness and permanent relationships
was over for men and for women. But then why did we look at poor Gennaro,
called Rino, as a threat? Dede would live her passion, would use it up, would go
on her way. Every so often she would see him again, they would exchange
some  affectionate  words.  The  process  was  that:  why  did  I  want  something
different for my daughter?
The question embarrassed me, I announced in my best authoritarian tone
that it was time to go to bed. Elsa had just finished vowing that in a few years,
once she got her high school diploma, she would go and live in the United
States with her father, and Imma was tugging on Pietro’s arm, she wanted
attention, she was no doubt about to ask if she could join him, too. Dede sat in
uncertain silence. Maybe, I thought, things are already resolved, Rino has been
put aside, now she’ll say to Elsa: You have to wait four years, I’m finishing high
school now and in a month at most I’m going to Papa’s.
22.
But as soon as Pietro and I were alone I had only to look at his face to
understand that he was very worried. He said: “There’s nothing to do.”
“What do you mean?”
“Dede functions by theorems.”
“What did she tell you?”
“It’s not important what she said but what she will certainly do.”
“She’ll go to bed with him?”
“Yes. She has a very firm plan, with the stages precisely marked out. Right
after her exams she’ll make a declaration to Rino, lose her virginity, they’ll
leave together and live by begging, putting the work ethic in crisis.”
“Don’t joke.”
“I’m not joking, I’m reporting her plan to you word for word.”
“Easy for you to be sarcastic, since you can avoid it, leaving the role of the
bad mother to me.”
“She’s counting on me. She said that as soon as that boy wants, she’ll come
to Boston, with him.”
“I’ll break her legs.”
“Or maybe he and she will break yours.”
We talked into the night, at first about Dede, then also about Elsa and Imma,
finally everything: politics, literature, the books I was writing, the newspaper
articles, a new essay he was working on. We hadn’t talked so much for a long
time. He teased me good-humoredly for always taking, in his view, a middle
position.  He  made  fun  of  my  halfway  feminism,  my  halfway  Marxism,  my
halfway Freudianism, my halfway Foucault-ism, my halfway subversiveness.
Only with me, he said in a slightly harsher tone, you never used half measures.
He sighed: Nothing was right for you, I was inadequate in everything. That
other man was perfect. But now? He acted like the rigorous person and he
ended up in the socialist gang. Elena, Elena, how you have tormented me. You
were  angry  with  me  even  when  those  kids  pointed  a  gun  at  me.  And  you
brought  to  our  house  your  childhood  friends  who  were  murderers.  You
remember?  But  so  what,  you’re  Elena,  I  loved  you  so  much,  we  have  two
children, and of course I still love you.
I let him talk. Then I admitted that I had often held senseless positions. I
even  admitted  that  he  was  right  about  Nino,  he  had  been  a  great
disappointment. And I tried to return to Dede and Rino. I was worried, I didn’t
know how to manage the issue. I said that to keep the boy away from our
daughter would cause, among other things, trouble with Lila and that I felt
guilty, I knew she would consider it an insult. He nodded.
“You have to help her.”
“I don’t know how to.”
“She’s trying everything possible to engage her mind and emerge from her
grief, but she’s unable to.”
“It’s not true, she did before, now she’s not even working, she’s not doing
anything.”
“You’re wrong.”
Lila had told him that she spent entire days in the Biblioteca Nazionale: she
wanted to learn all she could about Naples. I looked at him dubiously. Lila
again  in  a  library,  not  the  neighborhood  library  of  the  fifties  but  the
prestigious, inefficient Biblioteca Nazionale? That’s what she was doing when
she disappeared from the neighborhood? That was her new mania? And why
had she not told me about it? Or had she told Pietro just so that he would tell
me?
“She hid it from you?”
“She’ll talk to me about it when she needs to.”
“Urge her to continue. It’s unacceptable that a person so gifted stopped
school in fifth grade.”
“Lila does only what she feels like.”
“That’s how you want to see her.”
“I’ve known her since she was six.”
“Maybe she hates you for that.”
“She doesn’t hate me.”
“It’s hard to observe every day that you are free and she has remained a
prisoner. If there’s an inferno it’s inside her unsatisfied mind, I wouldn’t want
to enter it even for a few seconds.”
Pietro used precisely the phrase “enter it,” and his tone was of horror, of
fascination, of pity. I repeated: “Lina doesn’t hate me at all.”
He laughed.
“All right, as you like.”
“Let’s go to bed.”
He looked at me uncertainly. I hadn’t made up the cot as I usually did.
“Together?”
It was a dozen years since we had even touched each other. All night I was
afraid that the girls would wake up and find us in the same bed. I lay looking in
the shadowy light at that large, disheveled man, snoring faintly. Rarely, when
we were married, had he slept with me for long. Usually he tormented me for a
long time with his sex and his arduous orgasm, he fell asleep, then he got up
and went to study. This time lovemaking was pleasant, a farewell embrace, we
both knew it wouldn’t happen again and so we felt good. From Doriana Pietro
had learned what I had been unable or unwilling to teach him, and he did all he
could so that I would notice.
Around six I woke him, I said: It’s time for you to go. I went out to the car
with him, he urged me yet again to look after the girls, especially Dede. We
shook hands, we kissed each other on the cheeks, he left.
I walked idly to the newsstand, the news dealer was unpacking the papers. I
went home with, as usual, three dailies, whose headlines I would look at but no
more.  I  was  making  breakfast,  I  was  thinking  about  Pietro,  and  our
conversation.  I  could  have  lingered  on  any  subject—his  bland  resentment,
Dede,  his  somewhat  facile  psychologizing  about  Lila—and  yet  sometimes  a
mysterious  connection  is  established  between  our  mental  circuits  and  the
events whose echo is about to reach us. His description of Pasquale and Nadia—
the childhood friends he had polemically alluded to—as murderers had stayed
with  me.  To  Nadia—I  realized—I  by  now  applied  the  word  “murderer”
naturally,  to  Pasquale,  no,  I  continued  to  reject  it.  Yet  again,  I  was  asking
myself why when the telephone rang. It was Lila calling from downstairs. She
had heard me when I went out with Pietro and when I returned. She wanted to
know if I had bought the papers. She had just heard on the radio that Pasquale
had been arrested.
23.
That news absorbed us entirely for weeks, and I was more involved—I admit
—in the story of our friend than in Dede’s exams. Lila and I hurried to Carmen’s
house, but she already knew everything, or at least the essentials, and she
appeared serene. Pasquale had been arrested in the mountains of Serino, in the
Avellinese.  The  carabinieri  had  surrounded  the  farmhouse  where  he  was
hiding and he had behaved in a reasonable way, he hadn’t reacted violently, he
hadn’t tried to escape. Now—Carmen said—I only have to hope that they don’t
let him die in prison the way Papa did. She continued to consider her brother a
good person, in fact on the wave of her emotion she went so far as to say that
the three of us—she, Lila, and I—carried within us a quantity of wickedness
much greater than his. We have been capable of attending only to our own
affairs—she murmured, bursting into tears—not Pasquale, Pasquale grew up as
our father taught him.
Owing to the genuine suffering in those words, Carmen managed, perhaps
for the first time since we had known one another, to have the better of Lila
and me. For example, Lila didn’t make objections, and, as for me, I felt uneasy
at her speech. The Peluso siblings, by their mere existence in the background
of my life, confused me. I absolutely ruled out that their father the carpenter
had taught them, as Franco had done with Dede, to challenge the silly moral
fable of Menenius Agrippa, but both—Carmen less, Pasquale more—had always
known instinctively that the limbs of a man are not nourished when he fills the
belly of another, and that those who would make you believe it should sooner
or later get what they deserve. Although they were different in every way,
with their history they formed a block that I couldn’t relate to me or to Lila,
but that I couldn’t distance us from, either. So maybe one day I said to Carmen:
You should be happy, now that Pasquale is in the hands of the law we can
understand better how to help him; and the next day I said to Lila, in complete
agreement with her: Laws and guarantees count for nothing, whereas they
should protect those who have no power—in prison they’ll kill him. At times, I
even  admitted,  with  the  two  of  them,  that,  although  the  violence  we  had
experienced from birth now disgusted me, a modest amount was needed to
confront the fierce world we lived in. Along those confusing lines I undertook
to do everything possible for Pasquale. I didn’t want him to feel—unlike his
companion Nadia, who was treated with great consideration—like a nobody
whom nobody cared about.
24.
I looked for reliable lawyers, I even decided, through telephone calls, to
track down Nino, the only member of parliament I knew personally. I never
managed to speak to him but a secretary, after lengthy negotiations, made an
appointment for me. Tell him—I said coldly—that I’ll bring our daughter. At the
other end of the line there was a long moment of hesitation. I’ll let him know,
the woman said finally.
A  few  minutes  later  the  telephone  rang.  It  was  the  secretary  again:  the
Honorable Sarratore would be very happy to meet us in his office in Piazza
Risorgimento. But in the following days the place and hour of the appointment
changed continuously: the Honorable had left, the Honorable had returned but
was busy, the Honorable had an interminable sitting in parliament. I marveled
at how difficult it was to have direct contact—in spite of my modest fame, in
spite of my journalist’s credentials, in spite of the fact that I was the mother of
his child—with a representative of the people. When everything was finally set
—the location was nothing less than Montecitorio, the parliament itself—Imma
and I got dressed up and left for Rome. She asked if she could take her precious
electoral flyer, I said yes. In the train she kept looking at it, as if to prepare for
a comparison between the photograph and the reality. In the capital, we took a
taxi, we presented ourselves at Montecitorio. At every obstacle I showed our
papers  and  said,  mainly  so  that  Imma  could  hear:  We’re  expected  by  the
Honorable Sarratore, this is his daughter Imma, Imma Sarratore.
We waited a long time, the child at one point said, in the grip of anxiety:
What if the people hold him up? I reassured her: They won’t hold him up. Nino
finally arrived, preceded by the secretary, a very attractive young woman. Well
dressed, radiant, he hugged and kissed his daughter rapturously, picked her up
and held her the whole time, as if she were still little. But what surprised me
was the immediate assurance with which Imma clung to his neck and said to
him happily, unfolding the leaflet: You’re handsomer than in this photo, you
know my teacher voted for you?
Nino was very attentive to her; he had her tell him about school, about her
friends, about the subjects she liked best. He paid only the slightest attention
to  me,  by  now  I  belonged  to  another  life—an  inferior  life—and  it  seemed
pointless  to  waste  his  energies.  I  talked  about  Pasquale,  he  listened,  but
without neglecting his daughter, and nodded at the secretary to take notes. At
the end of my account he asked seriously: “What do you expect from me?”
“To find out if he’s in good health and is getting the full protection of the
law.”
“Is he cooperating with the law?”
“No, and I doubt that he ever will.”
“He’d be better off.”
“Like Nadia?”
He gave a small, embarrassed laugh.
“Nadia is behaving in the only way possible, if she doesn’t intend to spend
the rest of her life in jail.”
“Nadia is a spoiled girl, Pasquale isn’t.”
He didn’t answer right away, he pressed Imma’s nose as if it were a button
and imitated the sound of a bell. They laughed together and then he said: “I’ll
see  what  your  friend’s  situation  is,  I’m  here  to  be  sure  that  the  rights  of
everyone are protected. But I’ll tell him that the relatives of the people he
killed also have rights. You don’t play at being a rebel, shed real blood, and
then cry: we have rights. Do you understand, Imma?”
“Yes.”
“Yes, Papa.”
“Yes, Papa.”
“And if the teacher mistreats you, call me.”
I said:
“If the teacher mistreats her, she’ll manage by herself.”
“The way Pasquale Peluso managed?”
“Pasquale never asked anyone to protect him.”
“And that vindicates him?”
“No, but it’s significant that if Imma has to assert her right you tell her: call
me.”
“For your friend Pasquale aren’t you calling me?”
I left very nervous and unhappy, but for Imma it was the most important
day of her first seven years of life.
The days passed. I thought it had been a waste of time, but in fact Nino kept
his word, he looked into Pasquale’s situation. It was from him I learned, later,
things  that  the  lawyers  either  didn’t  know  or  didn’t  tell  us  about.  The
involvement of our friend in some notorious political crimes that had afflicted
Campania was at the center of Nadia’s detailed confession, but this had also
been common knowledge for some time. The new information, instead, was
that she now tended to ascribe everything to him, even acts of minor interest.
Thus the long list of Pasquale’s crimes included mentions of the murder of
Gino, of Bruno Soccavo, the death of Manuela Solara, and, finally, that of her
sons, Marcello and Michele.
“What agreement did your old girlfriend make with the carabinieri?” I asked
Nino the last time I saw him.
“I don’t know.”
“Nadia is telling a pile of lies.”
“I don’t rule it out. But one thing I know for sure: she is ruining a lot of
people who thought they were safe. So tell Lina to be careful, Nadia has always
hated her.”
25.
So many years had passed, and yet Nino didn’t miss a chance to mention
Lila, to show that he was solicitous of her even at a distance. I was there with
him, I had loved him, I had beside me his daughter who was licking a chocolate
ice-cream cone. But he considered me only a friend of his youth to whom he
could show off the extraordinary path he had traveled, from his high school
desk  to  a  seat  in  parliament.  In  that  last  encounter  of  ours  his  greatest
compliment was to put me on the same rung of the ladder. I don’t remember in
relation to what subject he said: The two of us climbed very high. But even as
he uttered that sentence I read in his gaze that the declaration of equality was
a sham. He considered himself much better than me and the proof was that, in
spite of my successful books, I stood before him as a petitioner. His eyes smiled
at me cordially, suggesting: Look what you lost by losing me.
I left in a hurry with the child. I was sure that he would have had quite a
different attitude if Lila had been present. He would have mumbled, he would
have  felt  mysteriously  crushed,  maybe  even  a  little  ridiculous  with  that
preening. When we reached the garage where I had left the car—that time I
had come to Rome by car—something occurred to me for the first time: only
with  Lila  had  Nino  put  at  risk  his  own  ambitions.  On  Ischia,  and  for  the
following  year,  he  had  given  in  to  a  romance  that  could  have  caused  him
nothing but trouble. An anomaly, in the journey of his life. At the time he was
already a well-known and very promising university student. He had taken up
with  Nadia—that  was  clear  to  me  now—because  she  was  the  daughter  of
Professor Galiani, because he had considered her the key to gaining access to
what  then  appeared  to  us  a  superior  class.  His  choices  had  always  been
consistent with his ambitions. Hadn’t he married Eleonora out of self-interest?
And I myself, when I had left Pietro for him, wasn’t I in fact a well-connected
woman, a writer of some success, with ties to an important publishing house—
useful, in short, to his career? And all the other women who had helped him:
didn’t they come under the same logic? Nino loved women, certainly, but he
was above all a cultivator of useful relations. What his intelligence produced
would never, alone, have had sufficient energy to assert itself, without the web
of power that he had been weaving since he was a boy. What about Lila? She
had  gone  to  school  up  to  fifth  grade,  she  was  the  very  young  wife  of  a
shopkeeper, if Stefano had known of their relationship he could have killed
them both. Why had Nino in that case gambled his entire future?
I put Imma in the car, I scolded her for letting the ice cream drip on the
dress bought for the occasion. I started the car, I left Rome. Maybe what had
attracted  Nino  was  the  impression  of  having  found  in  Lila  what  he,  too,
presumed he had and that now, just by comparison, he discovered that he
didn’t have. She possessed intelligence and didn’t put it to use but, rather,
wasted it, like a great lady for whom all the riches of the world are merely a
sign  of  vulgarity.  That  was  the  fact  that  must  have  beguiled  Nino:  the
gratuitousness of Lila’s intelligence. She stood out among so many because she,
naturally, did not submit to any training, to any use, or to any purpose. All of us had
submitted  and  that  submission  had—through  trials,  failures,  successes—
reduced us. Only Lila, nothing and no one seemed to reduce her. Rather, even if
over the years she became as stupid and intractable as anyone, the qualities
that  we  had  attributed  to  her  would  remain  intact,  maybe  they  would  be
magnified. Even when we hated her we ended by respecting her and fearing
her. It didn’t surprise me, when I thought about it, that Nadia, although she
had met Lila only a few times, detested her and wanted to hurt her. Lila had
taken Nino from her. Lila had humiliated her in her revolutionary beliefs. Lila
was mean and could hit before being hit. Lila was from the proletariat but
rejected any deliverance. In other words Lila was an honorable enemy and
hurting  her  could  be  pure  satisfaction,  without  the  store  of  guilt  that  a
designated victim like Pasquale would certainly arouse. Nadia could truly think
of  her  in  that  way.  How  tawdry  everything  had  become  over  the  years:
Professor Galiani, her house with a view of the bay, her thousands of books, her
paintings,  her  cultured  conversations,  Armando,  Nadia  herself.  She  was  so
pretty, so well brought up, when I saw her beside Nino, outside the school,
when she welcomed me to the party at her parents’ beautiful house. And there
was still something incomparable about her when she stripped herself of every
privilege with the idea that, in a radically new world, she would have a more
dazzling  garment.  But  now?  The  noble  reasons  for  that  denuding  had  all
dissolved. There remained the horror of so much blood stupidly shed and the
villainy  of  unloading  the  blame  on  the  former  bricklayer,  who  had  once
seemed to her the avant-garde of a new humanity, and who now, along with so
many others, served to reduce her own responsibilities almost to nothing.
I was upset. As I drove toward Naples I thought of Dede. I felt she was close
to making a mistake similar to Nadia’s, similar to all mistakes that take you
away from yourself. It was the end of July. The day before Dede had got the
highest  grades  on  her  graduation  exam.  She  was  an  Airota,  she  was  my
daughter, her brilliant intelligence could only produce the best results. Soon
she would be able to do much better than I had and even than her father. What
I had gained by hard work and much luck, she had taken, and would continue
to take, with ease, as if by birthright. Instead, what was her plan? To declare
her love for Rino. To sink with him, to rid herself of every advantage, lose
herself out of a spirit of solidarity and justice, out of fascination with what
doesn’t resemble us, because in the muttering of that boy she saw some sort of
extraordinary mind. I asked Imma suddenly, looking at her in the rearview
mirror: “Do you like Rino?”
“No, but Dede likes him.”
“How do you know?”
“Elsa told me.”
“And who told Elsa?”
“Dede.”
“Why don’t you like Rino?”
“Because he’s very ugly.”
“And who do you like?”
“Papa.”
I saw in her eyes the flame that in that moment she saw blazing around her
father. A light—I thought—that Nino would never have had if he had sunk with
Lila; the same light that Nadia had lost forever, sinking with Pasquale; and that
would abandon Dede if she were lost following Rino. Suddenly I felt with shame
that I could understand, and excuse, the irritation of Professor Galiani when
she  saw  her  daughter  on  Pasquale’s  knees,  I  understood  and  excused  Nino
when, one way or another, he withdrew from Lila, and, why not, I understood
and excused Adele when she had had to make the best of things and accept
that I would marry her son.
26.
As soon as I was back in the neighborhood I rang Lila’s bell. I found her
listless, absent, but now it was typical of her and I wasn’t worried. I told her in
detail what Nino had said and only at the end did I report that threatening
phrase that concerned her. I asked: “Seriously, can Nadia hurt you?”
She assumed a look of nonchalance.
“You can be hurt only if you love someone. But I don’t love anyone.”
“And Rino?”
“Rino’s gone.”
I immediately thought of Dede and her intentions. I was frightened.
“Where?”
She took a piece of paper from the table, she handed it to me, muttering: “He
wrote so well as a child and now look, he’s illiterate.”
I  read  the  note.  Rino,  very  laboriously,  said  he  was  tired  of  everything,
insulted Enzo heavily, announced that he had gone to Bologna to a friend he
had met during his military service. Six lines in all. No mention of Dede. My
heart was pounding in my chest. That writing, that spelling, that syntax, what
did they have to do with my daughter? Even his mother considered him a
failed  promise,  a  defeat,  perhaps  even  a  prophecy:  look  what  would  have
happened to Tina if they hadn’t taken her.
“He left by himself?” I asked.
“Who would he have left with?”
I  shook  my  head  uncertainly.  She  read  in  my  eyes  the  reason  for  my
concern, she smiled: “You’re afraid he left with Dede?”
27.
I hurried home, trailed by Imma. I went in, I called Dede, I called Elsa. No
answer. I rushed into the room where my older daughters slept and studied. I
found Dede lying on the bed, her eyes burning with tears. I felt relieved. I
thought that she had told Rino of her love and that he had rejected her.
I didn’t have time to speak: Imma, maybe because she hadn’t realized her
sister’s  state,  began  talking  enthusiastically  about  her  father,  but  Dede
rebuffed her with an insult in dialect, then sat up and burst into tears. I nodded
to  Imma  not  to  get  mad,  I  said  to  my  oldest  daughter  gently:  I  know  it’s
terrible, I know very well, but it will pass. The reaction was violent. As I was
caressing her hair she pulled away with an abrupt movement of her head,
crying:  What  are  you  talking  about,  you  don’t  know  anything,  you  don’t
understand anything, all you think about is yourself and the crap you write.
Then she handed me a piece of graph paper—rather—she threw it in my face
and ran away.
Once Imma realized that her sister was desperate, her eyes began to tear up
in turn. I whispered, to keep her occupied: Call Elsa, see where she is, and I
picked up the piece of paper. It was a day of notes. I immediately recognized
the fine handwriting of my second daughter. Elsa had written at length to
Dede. She explained to her that one can’t control feelings, that Rino had loved
her for a long time and that little by little she, too, had fallen in love. She knew,
of course, that she was causing her pain and she was sorry, but she also knew
that a possible renunciation of the loved person would not fix things. Then she
addressed me in an almost amused tone. She wrote that she had decided to
give up school, that my cult of study had always seemed to her foolish, that it
wasn’t books that made people good but good people who made some good
books. She emphasized that Rino was good, and yet he had never read a book;
she emphasized that her father was good and had made very good books. The
connection between books, people, and goodness ended there: I wasn’t cited.
She said goodbye with affection and told me not to be too angry: Dede and
Imma would give me the satisfactions that she no longer felt able to give me.
To her younger sister she dedicated a little heart with wings.
I turned into a fury. I was angry with Dede, who hadn’t realized how her
sister, as usual, intended to steal what she valued. You should have known, I
scolded her, you should have stopped her, you’re so intelligent and you let
yourself be tricked by a vain sly girl. Then I ran downstairs, I said to Lila:
“Your son didn’t go alone, your son took Elsa with him.”
She looked at me, disoriented:
“Elsa?”
“Yes. And Elsa is a minor. Rino is nine years older, I swear to God I’ll go to
the police and report him.”
She burst out laughing. It wasn’t a mean laugh but incredulous. She laughed
and said, alluding to her son:
“But look how much damage he was able to do, I underrated him. He made
both young ladies lose their heads, I can’t believe it. Lenù, come here, calm
down, sit down. If you think about it, there’s more to laugh at than cry about.”
I said in dialect that I found nothing to laugh at, that what Rino had done
was very serious, that I really was about to go to the police. Then she changed
her tone, she pointed to the door, she said:
“Go to the cops, go on, what are you waiting for?”
I left, but for the moment I gave up the idea of the police. I went home,
taking the steps two at a time. I shouted at Dede: I want to know where the
fuck they went, tell me immediately. She was frightened, Imma put her hands
over her ears, but I wouldn’t calm down until Dede admitted that Elsa had met
Rino’s Bolognese friend once when he came to the neighborhood.
“Do you know his name?”
“Yes.”
“Do you have the address, the phone number?”
She trembled, she was on the point of giving me the information I wanted.
Then, although by now she hated her sister even more than Rino, she must
have thought it would be shameful to collaborate and was silent. I’ll find it
myself, I cried, and began to turn her things upside down. I rummaged through
the whole house. Then I stopped. While I was looking for yet another piece of
paper, a note in a school diary, I realized that a lot else was missing. All the
money was gone from the drawer where I normally kept it, and all my jewelry
was gone, even my mother’s bracelet. Elsa had always been very fond of that
bracelet. She said, partly joking and partly serious, that her grandmother, if
she had made a will, would have left it to her and not to me.
28.
That discovery made me even more determined, and Dede finally gave me
the address and telephone number I was looking for. When she made up her
mind, despising herself for giving in, she shouted at me that I was just like Elsa,
we  didn’t  respect  anything  or  anyone.  I  silenced  her  and  went  to  the
telephone. Rino’s friend was called Moreno, I threatened him. I told him that I
knew he sold heroin, that I would get him in such deep trouble that he would
never get out of jail. I got nothing. He swore that he didn’t know anything
about Rino, that he remembered Dede, but that this daughter I was talking
about, Elsa, he had never met.
I went back to Lila. She opened the door, but now Enzo was there, who made
me sit down, and treated me kindly. I said I wanted to go to Bologna right
away, I ordered Lila to go with me.
“There’s no need,” she said, “you’ll see that when they run out of money
they’ll be back.”
“How much money did Rino take?”
“Nothing. He knows that if he touches even ten lire I’ll break his bones.”
I felt humiliated. I muttered:
“Elsa took my money and my jewelry.”
“Because you didn’t know how to bring her up.”
Enzo said to her:
“Stop it.”
She turned against him sharply:
“I say what I like. My son is a drug addict, my son didn’t study, my son
speaks and writes poorly, my son is a good-for-nothing, my son has all the sins.
But the one who steals is her daughter, the one who betrays her sister is Elsa.”
Enzo said to me:
“Let’s go, I’ll go with you to Bologna.”
We left in the car, we traveled at night. I had scarcely returned from Rome,
the trip in the car had tired me. The sorrow and the fury that had arisen had
absorbed all my remaining forces and now that the tension was easing I felt
exhausted. Sitting next to Enzo, as we left Naples and got on the highway, what
took hold was anxiety for the state in which I had left Dede, fear for what could
happen to Elsa, some shame for the way I had frightened Imma, the way I had
spoken to Lila, forgetting that Rino was her only child. I didn’t know whether
to telephone Pietro in America and tell him to come back right away, I didn’t
know if I really should go to the police. “We’ll solve it ourselves,” Enzo said,
feigning confidence. “Don’t worry, it’s pointless to hurt the boy.”
“I don’t want to report Rino,” I said. “I just want them to find Elsa.”
It was true. I muttered that I wanted to recover my daughter, go home, pack
my bags, not remain a minute longer in that house, in the neighborhood, in
Naples. It makes no sense, I said, that now Lila and I start fighting about who
brought up her children better, and if what happened is her fault or mine—I
can’t bear it.
Enzo listened to me at length, in silence, then, although I felt he had been
angry at Lila for a long time, he began to make excuses for her. He didn’t speak
about Rino, about the problems he caused his mother, but about Tina. He said:
If a being a few years old dies, she’s dead, it’s over, sooner or later you resign
yourself. But if she disappears, if you no longer know anything about her,
there’s not a thing that remains in her place, in your life. Will Tina never
return or will she return? And when she returns, will she be alive or dead?
Every moment—he murmured—you’re asking where she is. Is she a Gypsy on
the street? Is she at home with rich people who have no children? Are people
making her do horrible things and selling the photographs and films? Did they
cut her up and sell her heart for a high price so it could be transplanted to
another child’s chest? Are the other pieces underground, or were they burned?
Or is she under the ground intact, because she died accidentally after she was
abducted? And if earth and fire didn’t take her, and she is growing up who
knows where, what does she look like now, what will she become later, if we
meet her on the street will we recognize her? And if we recognize her who will
give us back everything we lost of her, everything that happened when we
weren’t there and little Tina felt abandoned?
At a certain point, while Enzo spoke in his laborious but dense sentences, I
saw his tears in the glow of the headlights, I knew he wasn’t talking only about
Lila but was trying to express his own suffering as well. That trip with him was
important; I still find it hard to imagine a man with a finer sensibility than his.
At first he told me what, every day, every night in those four years Lila had
whispered  or  shouted.  Then  he  urged  me  to  talk  about  my  work  and  my
dissatisfactions.  I  told  him  about  the  girls,  about  books,  about  men,  about
resentments, about the need for approval. And I mentioned all my writing,
which now had become obligatory, I struggled day and night to feel myself
present,  to  not  let  myself  be  marginalized,  to  fight  against  those  who
considered me an upstart little woman without talent: persecutors—I muttered
—whose only purpose is to make me lose my audience, and not because they’re
inspired by any elevated motives but, rather, for the enjoyment of keeping me
from improvement, or to carve out for themselves or for their protégés some
wretched power harmful to me. He let me vent, he praised the energy I put
into things. You see—he said—how excited you get. The effort has anchored
you to the world you’ve chosen, it’s given you broad and detailed expertise in
it, above all it has engaged your feelings. So life has dragged you along, and
Tina, for you, is certainly an atrocious episode, thinking about it makes you
sad, but it’s also, by now, a distant fact. For Lila, on the other hand, in all these
years, the world collapsed as if it were hearsay, and slid into the void left by
her daughter, like the rain that rushes down a drainpipe. She remains frozen at
Tina, and feels bitter toward everything that continues to be alive, that grows
and prospers. Of course, he said, she is strong, she treats me terribly, she gets
angry with you, she says ugly things. But you don’t know how many times she
has fainted just when she seemed tranquil, washing the dishes or staring out
the window at the stradone.
29.
In  Bologna  we  found  no  trace  of  Rino  and  my  daughter,  even  though
Moreno,  frightened  by  Enzo’s  fierce  calm,  dragged  us  through  streets  and
hangouts where, according to him, if they were in the city, the two would
certainly have been welcomed. Enzo telephoned Lila often, I Dede. We hoped
that there would be good news, but there wasn’t. At that point I was seized by a
new crisis, I no longer knew what to do. I said again: “I’m going to the police.”
Enzo shook his head.
“Wait a little.”
“Rino has ruined Elsa.”
“You can’t say that. You have to try to look at your daughters as they really
are.”
“It’s what I do continuously.”
“Yes, but you don’t do it well. Elsa would do anything to make Dede suffer
and they are in agreement on a single point: tormenting Imma.”
“Don’t make me say mean things: it’s Lila who sees them like that and you’re
repeating what she says.”
“Lila loves you, admires you, is fond of your daughters. It’s me who thinks
these things, and I’m saying them to help you be reasonable. Calm down, you’ll
see, we’ll find them.”
We didn’t find them, we decided to return to Naples. But as we were nearing
Florence Enzo wanted to call Lila again to find out if there was any news. When
he hung up he said, bewildered: “Dede needs to talk to you but Lina doesn’t
know why.”
“Is she at your house?”
“No, she’s at yours.”
I called immediately, I was afraid that Imma was sick. Dede didn’t even give
me a chance to speak, she said: “I’m leaving tomorrow for the United States,
I’m going to study there.”
I tried not to shout:
“Now is not the moment for that conversation, as soon as possible we’ll talk
about it with Papa.”
“One thing has to be clear, Mamma: Elsa will return to this house only when
I am gone.”
“For now the most urgent thing is to find out where she is.”
She cried to me in dialect:
“That bitch telephoned a little while ago, she’s at Grandma’s.”
30.
The grandma was, of course, Adele; I called my in-laws. Guido answered
coldly and put his wife on. Adele was cordial, she told me that Elsa was there
and added, Not only her.
“The boy’s there, too?”
“Yes.”
“Would you mind if I came to you?”
“We’re expecting you.”
I had Enzo leave me at the station in Florence. The journey was complicated,
with delays, waits, annoyances of every type. I thought about how Elsa, with
her sly capriciousness, had ended up involving Adele. If Dede was incapable of
deception, Elsa was at her best when it came to inventing strategies that could
protect her and perhaps let her win. She had planned, it was clear, to impose
Rino on me in the presence of her grandmother, a person who—she and her
sister knew well—had been very unwilling to accept me as a daughter-in-law.
For the entire journey I felt relieved because I knew she was safe and hated her
for the situation she was putting me in.
I arrived in Genoa ready for a hard battle. But I found Adele very welcoming
and Guido polite. As for Elsa—dressed for a party, heavily made up, on her
wrist my mother’s bracelet, and on full display the ring that years earlier her
father  had  given  me—she  was  affectionate  and  relaxed,  as  if  she  found  it
inconceivable that I could be mad at her. The only silent one, eyes perpetually
downcast, was Rino, so that I felt sorry for him and ended up more hostile
toward my daughter than toward him. Maybe Enzo was right, the boy had had
scant importance in that story. Of his mother’s hardness, her insolence, he had
no trace, it was Elsa who had dragged him along, beguiling him, and only to
hurt Dede. The rare times he had the courage to look at me his glances were
those of a faithful dog.
I quickly understood that Adele had received Elsa and Rino as a couple: they
had their own room, their own towels, they slept together. Elsa had no trouble
flaunting  that  intimacy  authorized  by  her  grandmother,  maybe  she  even
accentuated it for me. When the two withdrew after dinner, holding hands, my
mother-in-law tried to push me to confess my aversion for Rino. She’s a child,
she said at a certain point, I really don’t know what she sees in that young man,
she has to be helped to get out of it. I tried, I said: He’s a good kid, but even if
he  weren’t,  she’s  in  love  and  there’s  little  to  be  done.  I  thanked  her  for
welcoming them with affection and broad-mindedness, and went to bed.
But I spent the whole night thinking about the situation. If I said the wrong
thing, even just a wrong word, I would probably ruin both my daughters. I
couldn’t make a clean break between Elsa and Rino. I couldn’t oblige the two
sisters to live together at that impossible moment: what had happened was
serious and for a while the two girls couldn’t be under the same roof. To think
of moving to another city would only complicate things, Elsa would make it her
duty to stay with Rino. I quickly realized that if I wanted to take Elsa home and
get her to graduate from high school I would have to lose Dede—actually send
her to live with her father. So the next day, instructed by Adele about the best
time to call (she and her son—I discovered—talked to each other constantly), I
talked  to  Pietro.  His  mother  had  informed  him  in  detail  about  what  had
happened and from his bad mood I deduced that Adele’s true feelings were
certainly not what she showed me. Pietro said gravely: “We have to try to
understand  what  sort  of  parents  we’ve  been  and  how  we’ve  failed  our
daughters.”
“Are you saying that I haven’t been and am not a good mother?”
“I’m saying that there’s a need for continuity of affection and that neither
you nor I have been able to insure that Dede and Elsa have that.”
I interrupted him, announcing that he would have a chance to be a full-time
father  to  at  least  one  of  the  girls:  Dede  wanted  to  go  and  live  with  him
immediately, she would leave as soon as possible.
He didn’t take the news well, he was silent, he prevaricated, he said he was
still adapting and needed time. I answered: You know Dede, you’re identical,
even if you tell her no you’ll find her there.
The same day, as soon as I had a chance to talk to Elsa alone, I confronted
her, ignoring her blandishments. I had her give back the money, the jewelry,
my mother’s bracelet, which I immediately put on, stating: You must never
touch my things again.
She was conciliatory, I wasn’t, I hissed that I wouldn’t hesitate for a moment
to report first of all Rino, and then her. As soon as she tried to answer I pushed
her against a wall, I raised my hand to hit her. I must have had a terrible
expression, she burst into terrified tears.
“I hate you,” she sobbed. “I don’t ever want to see you again, I will never go
back to that shitty place where you made us live.”
“All right, I’ll leave you here for the summer, if your grandparents don’t kick
you out first.”
“And then?”
“Then  in  September  you’ll  come  home,  you’ll  go  to  school,  you’ll  study,
you’ll live with Rino in our apartment until you’ve had enough of him.”
She stared at me, stunned; there was a long instant of incredulity. I had
uttered those words as if they contained the most terrible punishment, she
took them as a surprising gesture of generosity.
“Really?”
“Yes.”
“I’ll never have enough of him.”
“We’ll see.”
“And Aunt Lina?”
“Aunt Lina will agree.”
“I didn’t want to hurt Dede, Mamma, I love Rino, it happened.”
“It will happen countless more times.”
“It’s not true.”
“Worse for you. It means you’ll love Rino your whole life.”
“You’re making fun of me.”
I said no, I felt only all the absurdity of that verb in the mouth of a child.
31.
I  returned  to  the  neighborhood,  I  told  Lila  what  I  had  proposed  to  the
children. It was a cold exchange, almost a negotiation.
“You’ll have them in your house?”
“Yes.”
“If it’s all right with you, it’s all right with me, too.”
“We’ll split the expenses.”
“I can pay it all.”
“For now I have money.”
“For now I do, too.”
“We’re agreed, then.”
“How did Dede take it?”
“Fine. She’s leaving in a couple of weeks, she’s going to visit her father.”
“Tell her to come and say goodbye.”
“I don’t think she will.”
“Then tell her to say hello to Pietro for me.”
“I’ll do that.”
Suddenly  I  felt  a  great  sorrow,  I  said:  “In  just  a  few  days  I’ve  lost  two
daughters.”
“Don’t use that expression: you haven’t lost anything, rather you’ve gained a
son.”
“It’s you who pushed him in that direction.”
She wrinkled her forehead, she seemed confused.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“You always have to incite, shove, poke.”
“Now you want to get mad at me, too, for what your children get up to?”
I muttered, I’m tired, and left.
For days, for weeks, in fact, I couldn’t stop thinking that Lila couldn’t bear
the equilibrium in my life and so aimed at disrupting it. It had always been so,
but after Tina’s disappearance it had worsened: she made a move, observed the
consequences, made another move. The objective? Maybe not even she knew.
Of course the relationship of the two sisters was ruined, Elsa was in terrible
trouble,  Dede  was  leaving,  I  would  remain  in  the  neighborhood  for  an
indeterminate amount of time.
32.
I was preoccupied with Dede’s departure. Occasionally I said to her: Stay,
you’re making me very unhappy. She answered: You have so many things to
do, you won’t even notice I’m gone. I insisted: Imma adores you and so does
Elsa, you’ll clear things up, it will pass. But Dede didn’t want to hear her sister’s
name, as soon as I mentioned it she assumed an expression of disgust and went
out, slamming the door.
A few nights before her departure she suddenly grew very pale—we were
having dinner—and began to tremble. She muttered: I can’t breathe. Imma
quickly poured her a glass of water. Dede took a sip, then left her place and
came to sit on my lap. It was something she had never done. She was big, taller
than me, she had long since cut off even the slightest contact between our
bodies; if by chance we touched she sprang back as if by a force of repulsion.
Her weight surprised me, her warmth, her full hips. I held her around the
waist, she put her arms around my neck, she wept with deep sobs. Imma left
her place at the table, came over and tried to be included in the embrace. She
must have thought that her sister wouldn’t leave, and for the next days she
was happy, she behaved as if everything had been put right. But Dede did
leave; rather, after that breakdown she seemed tougher and more determined.
With Imma she was affectionate, she kissed her hundreds of times, she said: I
want at least one letter a week. She let me hug and kiss her, but without
returning it. I hovered around her, I struggled to predict her every desire, it
was useless. When I complained of her coldness she said: It’s impossible to have
a real relationship with you, the only things that count are work and Aunt
Lina;  there’s  nothing  that’s  not  swallowed  up  inside  them,  the  real
punishment, for Elsa, is to stay here. Bye, Mamma.
On the positive side there was only the fact that she had gone back to calling
her sister by name.
33.
When, in early September of 1988, Elsa returned home, I hoped that her
liveliness would drive out the impression that Lila really had managed to pull
me down into her void. But it wasn’t so. Rino’s presence in the house, instead
of  giving  new  life  to  the  rooms,  made  them  bleak.  He  was  an  affectionate
youth, completely submissive to Elsa and Imma, who treated him like their
servant. I myself, I have to say, got into the habit of entrusting to him endless
boring tasks—mainly the long lines at the post office—which left me more time
to work. But it depressed me to see that big slow body around, available at the
slightest nod and yet moping, always obedient except when it came to basic
rules  like  remembering  to  raise  the  toilet  seat  when  he  peed,  leaving  the
bathtub clean, not leaving his dirty socks and underwear on the floor.
Elsa  didn’t  lift  a  finger  to  improve  the  situation,  rather  she  purposely
complicated it. I didn’t like her coy ways with Rino in front of Imma, I hated
her  performance  as  an  uninhibited  woman  when  in  fact  she  was  a  girl  of
fifteen. Above all I couldn’t bear the state in which she left the room where
once she had slept with Dede and which now she occupied with Rino. She got
out of bed, sleepily, to go to school, had breakfast quickly, slipped away. After a
while Rino appeared, ate for an hour, shut himself in the bathroom for at least
another  half  hour,  got  dressed,  hung  around,  went  out,  picked  up  Elsa  at
school.  When  they  got  back  they  ate  cheerfully  and  immediately  shut
themselves in the room.
That room was like a crime scene, Elsa didn’t want me to touch anything.
But neither of them bothered to open the windows or tidy up a little. I did it
before Pinuccia arrived; it annoyed me that she would smell the odor of sex,
that she would find traces of their relations.
Pinuccia didn’t like the situation. When it came to dresses, shoes, makeup,
hairstyles, she admired what she called my modernity, but in this case she let
me understand quickly and in every possible way that I had made a decision
that  was  too  modern,  an  opinion  that  must  have  been  widespread  in  the
neighborhood. It was very unpleasant, one morning, to find her there, as I was
trying to work, with a newspaper on which lay a condom, knotted so that the
semen wouldn’t spill. I found it at the foot of the bed, she said disgusted. I
pretended  it  was  nothing.  There’s  no  need  to  show  it  to  me,  I  remarked,
continuing to type on the computer, there’s the wastebasket for that.
In reality I didn’t know how to behave. At first I thought that over time
everything would improve. Every day there were clashes with Elsa, but I tried
not to overdo it; I still felt wounded by Dede’s departure and didn’t want to
lose her as well. So I went more and more often to Lila to say to her: Tell Rino,
he’s a good boy, try to explain that he has to be a little neater. But she seemed
just to be waiting for my complaints to pick a quarrel.
“Send him back here,” she raged one morning, “enough of that nonsense of
staying at your house. Rather, let’s do this: there’s room, when your daughter
wants to see him she comes down, knocks, and sleeps here if she wants.”
I was annoyed. My child had to knock and ask if she could sleep with hers? I
muttered:
“No, it’s fine like this.”
“If it’s fine like this, what are we talking about?”
I fumed.
“Lila, I’m just asking you to talk to Rino: he’s twenty-four years old, tell him
to behave like an adult. I don’t want to be quarreling with Elsa continuously,
I’m in danger of losing my temper and driving her out of the house.”
“Then the problem is your child, not mine.”
On  those  occasions  the  tension  rose  rapidly  but  had  no  outlet;  she  was
sarcastic, I went home frustrated. One evening we were having dinner when,
from the stairs, her intransigent cry reached us, she wanted Rino to come to
her immediately. He got agitated, Elsa offered to go with him. But as soon as
Lila saw her she said: This is our business, go home. My daughter returned
sullenly and meanwhile downstairs a violent quarrel erupted. Lila shouted,
Enzo shouted, Rino shouted. I suffered for Elsa, who was anxiously wringing
her hands, she said: Mamma, do something, what’s happening, why do they
treat him like that?
I said nothing, I did nothing. The quarrel stopped, some time passed, Rino
didn’t return. Elsa then insisted that I go see what had happened. I went down
and Enzo, not Lila, opened the door. He was tired, depressed, he didn’t invite
me to come in. He said:
“Lila told me that the boy doesn’t behave well, so from now on he’s staying
here.”
“Let me talk to her.”
I discussed it with Lila until late into the night; Enzo, gloomy, shut himself in
another  room.  I  understood  almost  immediately  that  she  wanted  to  be
thanked. She had intervened, she had taken back her son, had humiliated him.
Now she wanted me to say to her: Your son is like a son of mine, it’s fine with
me that he’s at my house, that he sleeps with Elsa, I won’t come and complain
anymore. I resisted for a long time, then I gave in and brought Rino back to my
house. As soon as we left the apartment I heard her and Enzo start fighting
again.
34.
Rino was grateful.
“I owe you everything, Aunt Lenù, you’re the best person I know and I’ll
always love you.”
“Rino, I’m not good at all. All you owe me is the favor of remembering that
we  have  a  single  bathroom  and,  besides  Elsa,  Imma  and  I  also  use  that
bathroom.”
“You’re right, I’m sorry, sometimes I get distracted, I won’t do it anymore.”
He constantly apologized, he was constantly distracted. He was, in his way,
in  good  faith.  He  declared  endlessly  that  he  wanted  to  find  a  job,  that  he
wanted to contribute to the household expenses, that he would be very careful
not to cause me trouble in any way, that he had an unbounded respect for me.
But he didn’t find a job, and life, in all the most dispiriting aspects of dailiness,
continued as before, and perhaps worse. At any rate, I stopped going to Lila. I
told her: Everything’s fine.
It was becoming very clear to me that the tension between her and Enzo was
increasing, and I didn’t want to be the fuse for their rages. What had been
upsetting me, for a while, was that the nature of their arguments had changed.
In the past Lila yelled and Enzo for the most part was silent. But now it wasn’t
like that. She yelled, I often heard Tina’s name, and her voice, filtered through
the  floor,  seemed  a  kind  of  sick  whine.  Then  suddenly  Enzo  exploded.  He
shouted and his shouting extended into a tumultuous torrent of exasperated
words,  all  in  violent  dialect.  Lila  was  silent  then;  while  Enzo  shouted  she
couldn’t be heard. But as soon as he was silent you could hear the door slam. I
strained my ears for the shuffling of Lila on the stairs, in the entrance. Then
her steps vanished in the sounds of the traffic on the stradone.
Enzo used to run after her, but now he didn’t. I thought: maybe I should go
down, talk to him, tell him: You yourself told me how Lina continues to suffer,
be understanding. But I gave up and hoped that she would return soon. But she
stayed  away  the  whole  day  and  sometimes  even  the  night.  What  was  she
doing? I imagined that she took refuge in some library, as Pietro had told me,
or  that  she  was  wandering  through  Naples,  noting  every  building,  every
church, every monument, every plaque. Or that she was combining the two
things:  first  she  explored  the  city,  then  she  dug  around  in  books  to  find
information. Overwhelmed by events, I had never had the wish or the time to
mention that new mania, nor had she ever talked to me about it. But I knew
how she could become obsessively focused when something interested her,
and it didn’t surprise me that she could dedicate so much time and energy to it.
I thought about it with some concern only when her disappearances followed
the shouting, and the shadow of Tina joined the one vanishing into the city,
even  at  night.  Then  the  tunnels  of  tufa  under  the  city  came  to  mind,  the
catacombs with rows of death’s-heads, the skulls of blackened bronze that led
to the unhappy souls of the church of Purgatorio ad Arco. And sometimes I
stayed awake until I heard the street door slam and her footsteps on the stairs.
On one of those dark days the police appeared. There had been a quarrel, she
had left. I looked out at the window in alarm, I saw the police heading toward
our building. I was frightened, I thought something had happened to Lila. I
hurried onto the landing. The police were looking for Enzo, they had come to
arrest him. I tried to intervene, to understand. I was rudely silenced, they took
him away in handcuffs. As he went down the stairs Enzo shouted to me in
dialect: When Lina gets back tell her not to worry, it’s a lot of nonsense.
35.
For a long time it was hard to know what he was accused of. Lila stopped
being hostile toward him, gathered her strength, and concerned herself only
with  him.  In  that  new  ordeal  she  was  silent  and  determined.  She  became
enraged only when she discovered that the state—since she had no official
bond with Enzo and, furthermore, had never been separated from Stefano—
wouldn’t grant her a status equivalent to a wife or, as a result, the possibility of
seeing him. She began to spend a lot of money so that, through unofficial
channels, he would feel her closeness and her support.
Meanwhile I went back to Nino. I knew from Marisa that it was useless to
expect help from him, he wouldn’t lift a finger even for his own father, his
mother, his siblings. But with me he again readily made an effort, maybe to
make a good impression on Imma, maybe because it meant showing Lila, if
indirectly, his power. Not even he, however, could understand precisely what
Enzo’s situation was and at different times he gave me different versions that
he himself admitted were not reliable. What had happened? It was certain that
Nadia, in the course of her sobbing confessions, had mentioned Enzo’s name. It
was certain that she had dug up the period when Enzo, with Pasquale, had
frequented the worker-student collective in Via dei Tribunali. It was certain
that she had implicated them both in small demonstrations, carried out, many
years earlier, against the property of NATO officials who lived in Via Manzoni.
It was certain that the investigators were trying to involve Enzo, too, in many
of the crimes that they had attributed to Pasquale. But at this point certainties
ended and suppositions began. Maybe Nadia had claimed that Enzo had had
recourse to Pasquale for crimes of a nonpolitical nature. Maybe Nadia  had
claimed that some of those bloody acts—in particular the murder of Bruno
Soccavo—had been carried out by Pasquale and planned by Enzo. Maybe Nadia
had said she had learned from Pasquale himself that it was three men who
killed the Solara brothers: him, Antonio Cappuccio, Enzo Scanno, childhood
friends who, incited by a longtime solidarity and by an equally longstanding
resentment, had committed that crime.
They were complicated years. The order of the world in which we had grown
up was dissolving. The old skills resulting from long study and knowledge of
the  correct  political  line  suddenly  seemed  senseless.  Anarchist,  Marxist,
Gramscian,  Communist,  Leninist,  Trotskyite,  Maoist,  worker  were  quickly
becoming obsolete labels or, worse, a mark of brutality. The exploitation of
man  by  man  and  the  logic  of  maximum  profit,  which  before  had  been
considered an abomination, had returned to become the linchpins of freedom
and  democracy  everywhere.  Meanwhile,  by  means  legal  and  illegal,  all  the
accounts  that  remained  open  in  the  state  and  in  the  revolutionary
organizations were being closed with a heavy hand. One might easily end up
murdered or in jail, and among the common people a stampede had begun.
People like Nino, who had a seat in parliament, and like Armando Galiani—who
was now famous, thanks to television—had intuited for a while that the climate
was changing and had quickly adapted to the new season. As for those like
Nadia,  evidently  they  had  been  well  advised  and  were  cleansing  their
consciences by informing. But not people like Pasquale and Enzo. I imagine
that  they  continued  to  think,  to  express  themselves,  to  attack,  to  defend,
resorting to watchwords they had learned in the sixties and seventies. In truth,
Pasquale carried on his war even in prison, and to the servants of the state said
not a word, either to implicate or to exonerate himself. Enzo, on the other
hand, certainly talked. In his usual laborious way, weighing every word with
care, he displayed his feelings as a Communist but at the same time denied all
the charges that had been brought against him.
Lila, for her part, focused her acute intelligence, her bad character, and very
expensive lawyers on the battle to get him out of trouble. Enzo a strategist? A
combatant? And when, if he had been working for years, from morning to
night, at Basic Sight? How would it have been possible to kill the Solaras with
Antonio and Pasquale if he was in Avellino at the time and Antonio was in
Germany? Above all, even admitting that it was possible, the three friends
were well known in the neighborhood and, masked or not, would have been
recognized.
But there was little to do, the wheels of justice, as they say, advanced, and at
a certain point I was afraid that Lila, too, would be arrested. Nadia named
names upon names. They arrested some of those who had been part of the
collective of Via dei Tribunali—one worked at the U.N., one at the F.A.O., one
was a bank employee—and even Armando’s former wife, Isabella, a peaceful
housewife married to a technician at Enel, got her turn. Nadia spared only two
people: her brother and, in spite of widespread fears, Lila. Maybe the daughter
of Professor Galiani thought that by involving Enzo she had already struck her
deeply. Or maybe she hated her and yet respected her, so that after much
hesitation she decided to keep her out of it. Or maybe she was afraid of her,
and feared a direct confrontation. But I prefer the hypothesis that she knew
the story of Tina and took pity on her, or, better still, she had thought that if a
mother has an experience like that, there is nothing that can truly hurt her.
Meanwhile,  eventually,  the  charges  against  Enzo  proved  to  be  without
substance,  justice  lost  its  grip,  got  tired.  After  many  months,  very  little
remained standing: his old friendship with Pasquale, militancy in the worker-
student committee in the days of San Giovanni a Teduccio, the fact that the
run-down farmhouse in the mountains of Serino, the one where Pasquale had
been hiding, was rented to one of his Avellinese relations. Step by judicial step,
he who had been considered a dangerous leader, the planner and executor of
savage crimes, was demoted to sympathizer with the armed struggle. When
finally even those sympathies proved to be generic opinions that had never
been transmuted into criminal actions, Enzo returned home.
But  by  then  almost  two  years  had  passed  since  his  arrest,  and  in  the
neighborhood a reputation as a terrorist who was much more dangerous than
Pasquale  Peluso  had  solidified  around  him.  Pasquale—said  people  on  the
streets and in the shops—we’ve all known him since he was a child, he always
worked, his only crime was that he was always an upright man who, even after
the fall of the Berlin Wall, didn’t shed the uniform of a Communist his father
sewed on him, who took on himself the sins of others and will never surrender.
Enzo, on the other hand—they said—is very intelligent, he is well camouflaged
by his silences and by the Basic Sight millions, above all he has behind him,
directing  him,  Lina  Cerullo,  his  black  soul,  more  intelligent  and  more
dangerous than he is: the two of them, yes, they must have done horrible
things. Thus, as spiteful rumors accumulated, they were both marked out as
people who not only had shed blood but had been clever enough to get away
with it.
In  that  climate  their  business,  already  in  trouble  because  of  Lila’s
indifference  and  the  money  she  had  spent  on  lawyers  and  other  things,
couldn’t get going again. By mutual consent they sold it, and although Enzo
had often imagined that it was worth a billion lire, they barely got a couple of
hundred million. In the spring of 1992, when they had stopped fighting, they
separated both as business partners and as a couple. Enzo left a good part of
the money to Lila and went to look for work in Milan. To me he said one
afternoon: Stay near her, she’s a woman who isn’t comfortable with herself,
she’ll have a hard old age. For a while he wrote regularly, I did the same. A
couple of times he called me. Then that was all.
36.
More or less around the same time another couple broke up, Elsa and Rino.
Their love and complicity lasted for five or six months, at which point my
daughter  took  me  aside  and  confided  that  she  felt  attracted  to  a  young
mathematics teacher, a teacher in another section who didn’t even know of
her existence. I asked:
“And Rino?”
She answered:
“He is my great love.”
I understood, as she added jokes to sighs, that she was making a distinction
between love and attraction, and that her love for Rino wasn’t affected in the
least by her attraction to the teacher.
Since I was as usual stressed—I was writing a lot, publishing a lot, traveling a
lot—it  was  Imma  who  became  the  confidante  of  both  Elsa  and  Rino.  My
youngest daughter, who respected the feelings of both, gained the trust of both
and became a reliable source of information for me. I learned from her that
Elsa had succeeded in her intention of seducing the professor. I learned from
her that Rino had eventually begun to suspect that things with Elsa weren’t
going well. I learned from her that Elsa had abandoned the professor so that
Rino wouldn’t suffer. I learned from her that, after a break of a month, she had
started up again. I learned from her that Rino, suffering for almost a year,
finally confronted her, weeping, and begged her to tell him if she still loved
him. I learned from her that Elsa had shouted at him: I don’t love you anymore,
I love someone else. I learned from her that Rino had slapped her, but only with
his fingertips, just to show he was a man. I learned from her that Elsa had run
to the kitchen, grabbed the broom, and beaten him furiously, with no reaction
from him.
From Lila, however, I learned that Rino—when I was absent and Elsa didn’t
come home from school and stayed out all night—had gone to her in despair.
Pay some attention to your daughter, she said one evening, try to understand
what she wants. But she said it indifferently, without concern for Elsa’s future
or for Rino’s. In fact she added: Besides, look, if you have your commitments
and  you  don’t  want  to  do  anything  it’s  all  right  just  the  same.  Then  she
muttered: We weren’t made for children. I wanted to respond that I felt I was a
good  mother  and  wore  myself  out  trying  to  do  my  work  without  taking
anything away from Dede, Elsa, and Imma. But I didn’t, I perceived that at that
moment she wasn’t angry with me or my daughter, she was only trying to
make her own indifference toward Rino seem normal.
Things were different when Elsa left the professor, and began going out with
a classmate with whom she was studying for her final exams. She told Rino
right away, so that he would understand that it was over. Lila then came up to
my house, and, taking advantage of the fact that I was in Turin, made an ugly
scene. What did your mother put in your head, she said in dialect, you have no
sensitivity, you hurt people and don’t realize it. Then she yelled at her: My
dear,  you  think  you’re  so  important,  but  you’re  a  whore.  Or  at  least  Elsa
reported that, entirely confirmed by Imma, who said to me: It’s true, Mamma,
she called her a whore.
Whatever Lila had said, my second daughter was marked by it. She lost her
lightness. She also gave up the schoolmate she was studying with, and became
nice to Rino, but she left him alone in the bed and moved to Imma’s room.
When the exams were over she decided to visit her father and Dede, even
though Dede had never given any sign of wanting to reconcile with her. She
left for Boston, and there the two sisters, helped by Pietro, agreed on the fact
that being in love with Rino had been a mistake. Once they made peace they
had a good time, traveling around the United States, and when Elsa returned to
Naples she seemed more serene. But she didn’t stay with me for long. She
enrolled  in  Physics,  she  became  frivolous  and  sharp  again,  she  changed
boyfriends frequently. Since she was pursued by her schoolmate, by the young
mathematics  teacher,  and  naturally  by  Rino,  she  didn’t  take  her  exams,
returned to her old loves, mixed them with new ones, accomplished nothing.
Finally she flew off again to the United States, having decided to study there.
She,  like  Dede,  left  without  saying  goodbye  to  Lila,  but  completely
unexpectedly she spoke of her positively. She said that she understood why I
had been her friend for so many years, and, without irony, called her the best
person she had ever known.
37.
That was not Rino’s opinion, however. Elsa’s departure did not stop him,
surprising as it may seem, from continuing to live with me. He was in despair
for  a  long  time,  afraid  of  falling  again  into  the  physical  and  moral
wretchedness from which I had rescued him. Full of devotion he attributed
that and many other virtues to me. And he continued to occupy the room that
had been Dede and Elsa’s. He naturally did many jobs for me. When I left he
drove me to the station and carried my suitcase, when I returned he did the
same. He became my driver, my errand boy, my factotum. If he needed money
he asked me for it politely, affectionately, and without the least scruple.
At times, when he made me nervous, I reminded him that he had some
obligations toward his mother. He understood and disappeared for a while. But
sooner or later he returned discouraged, muttering that Lila was never home,
that the empty apartment made him sad, or he grumbled: She didn’t even say
hello, she sits at her computer and writes.
Lila was writing? What was she writing?
My  curiosity  at  first  was  faint,  the  equivalent  of  an  absent-minded
observation. I was nearly fifty at the time, I was in the period of my greatest
success,  I  was  publishing  two  books  a  year,  and  selling  well.  Reading  and
writing had become a career, and, like all careers, it began to burden me. I
remember thinking: in her place I’d sit on a beach in the sun. Then I said to
myself: if writing helps her, good. And I went on to something else, I forgot
about it.
38.
Dede’s departure and then Elsa’s grieved me. It depressed me that both, in
the end, preferred their father to me. Of course they loved me, of course they
missed me. I sent letters constantly, at moments of melancholy I telephoned
without caring about the expense. And I liked Dede’s voice when she said, I
dream of you often; how moved I was if Elsa wrote, I’m looking everywhere for
your perfume, I want to use it, too. But the fact was that they were gone, I had
lost them. Every letter of theirs, every telephone call attested to the fact that,
even if they suffered because of our separation, with their father they didn’t
have the conflicts they had had with me, he was the point of entry to their true
world.
One morning Lila said to me in a tone that was hard to decipher: It makes no
sense for you to keep Imma here in the neighborhood, send her to Rome to
Nino, it’s very clear that she wants to be able to say to her sisters, I’ve done
what you did. Those words had an unpleasant effect on me. As if she were
giving dispassionate advice, she was suggesting that I separate also from my
third child. She seemed to be saying: Imma would be better off and so would
you. I replied: If Imma leaves me, too, my life will no longer have meaning. But
she smiled: Where is it written that lives should have a meaning? So she began
to  disparage  all  that  struggle  of  mine  to  write.  She  said  mockingly:  Is  the
meaning that line of black markings that look like insect shit? She invited me
to take a rest, she exclaimed: What need is there to work so hard. Enough.
I had a long period of uneasiness. On the one hand I thought: she wants to
deprive me of Imma, too. On the other I said to myself: she’s right, I should
bring Imma and her father together. I didn’t know whether to cling to the
affection of the only child who remained or, for her sake, to try to reinforce
her bond with Nino.
This last was not easy, and the recent elections had been proof of it. Imma
was eleven—but she was inflamed by political passion. She wrote, I remember,
to her father, she called him, she offered in every possible way to campaign for
him and wanted me to help him, too. I hated the socialists even more than in
the past. When I saw Nino I’d made remarks like: What’s become of you, I no
longer  recognize  you.  I  went  so  far  as  to  say,  with  some  rhetorical
exaggeration:  We  were  born  in  poverty  and  violence,  the  Solaras  were
criminals who stole everything, but you are worse, you are gangs of looters
who make laws against the looting of others. He had answered lightheartedly:
You’ve  never  understood  anything  about  politics  and  you  never  will
understand anything, play with literature and don’t talk about things you don’t
know about.
But  then  the  situation  came  to  a  head.  Long-standing  corruption—
commonly  practiced  and  commonly  submitted  to  at  every  level  as  an
unwritten rule but always in force among the most widely respected—came to
the surface thanks to a sudden determination of the judiciary. The high-level
crooks, who at first seemed few and so inexperienced that they were caught
with  their  hands  in  the  till,  multiplied,  became  the  true  face  of  the
management of the republic. As the elections approached I saw that Nino was
less carefree. Since I had my fame and a certain reputation, he used Imma to
ask me to stand behind him publicly. I said yes to the child in order not to
upset her, but then in fact I withdrew. Imma was angry, she repeated her
support  for  her  father  and  when  he  asked  her  to  stand  next  to  him  in  a
campaign ad she was enthusiastic. I rebelled and found myself in a terrible
situation. On the one hand I didn’t refuse Imma permission—it would have
been impossible without a rift—on the other I scolded Nino on the telephone:
Put Albertino, put Lidia in your ad, and don’t dare use my daughter in this way.
He insisted, he hesitated, finally he gave in. I forced him to tell Imma that he
had inquired and that children weren’t allowed in the ads. But she understood
that  I  was  the  reason  she  had  been  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  standing
publicly next to her father, and she said: You don’t love me, Mamma, you send
Dede and Elsa to Pietro, but I can’t even spend five minutes with Papa. When
Nino wasn’t reelected Imma began to cry, she muttered between her sobs that
it was my fault.
In  other  words,  it  was  all  complicated.  Nino  was  bitter,  he  became
intractable. For a while he seemed to be the only victim of those elections, but
it wasn’t so, soon the entire system of the parties was swept away and we lost
track of him. The voters were angry with the old, the new, and the very new. If
people had been horrified at those who wanted to overthrow the state, now
they were disgusted by those who, pretending to serve it, had consumed it, like
a fat worm in the apple. A black wave, which had lain hidden under gaudy
trappings of power and a flow of words as impudent as it was arrogant, became
increasingly visible and spread to every corner of Italy. The neighborhood of
my childhood wasn’t the only place untouched by any grace, Naples wasn’t the
only  irredeemable  city.  I  met  Lila  on  the  stairs  one  morning,  she  seemed
cheerful. She showed me the copy of the Repubblica she had just bought. There
was a photograph of Professor Guido Airota. The photographer had caught on
his face, I don’t know when, a frightened expression that made him almost
unrecognizable.  The  article,  full  of  they-says  and  perhapses,  advanced  the
hypothesis  that  even  the  prestigious  scholar,  not  to  mention  old  political
operator,  might  soon  be  summoned  by  the  judges  as  one  who  was  well
informed about the corruption of Italy.
39.
Guido  Airota  never  appeared  before  the  judges,  but  for  days  dailies  and
weeklies drew maps of corruption in which even he played a part. I was glad, in
that situation, that Pietro was in America, that Dede and Elsa, too, now had a
life on the other side of the ocean. But I was worried about Adele, I thought I
should at least telephone her. But I hesitated, I said to myself: she’ll think that
I’m enjoying it and it will be hard to convince her it’s not true.
Instead I called Mariarosa, it seemed to me an easier path to take. I was
wrong. It was years since I’d seen or spoken to her, she answered coldly. She
said with a note of sarcasm: What a career you’ve had, my dear, now you’re
read everywhere, one can’t open a newspaper or a journal without finding
your name. Then she spoke in detail about herself, something she had never
done in the past. She cited books, she cited articles, she cited travels. It struck
me mainly that she had left the university.
“Why?” I asked.
“It disgusted me.”
“And now?”
“Now what?”
“How do you live?”
“I have a rich family.”
But she regretted that phrase as soon as she uttered it, she laughed uneasily,
and it was she, right afterward, who spoke of her father. She said: It was bound
to happen. And she quoted Franco, she said that he had been among the first to
understand  that  either  everything  would  change,  and  in  a  hurry,  or  even
harder times would come and there would be no more hope. She was angry:
My  father  thought  you  could  change  one  thing  here  and  one  there,
deliberately. But when you change almost nothing like that you’re forced to
enter into the system of lies and either you tell them, like the others, or they
get rid of you. I asked her: “Guido is guilty, he took money?”
She laughed nervously: “Yes. But he is entirely innocent, in his whole life he
never put a single lira that wasn’t more than legal in his pocket.”
Then she turned again to me, but in an almost offensive tone. She repeated:
You write too much, you no longer surprise me. And although I had been the
one to call, it was she who said goodbye and hung up.
The incongruous double judgment that Mariarosa had pronounced on her
father was true. The media storm around Guido slowly faded and he returned
to his study, but as an innocent who surely was guilty and, if you like, as a
guilty man who surely was innocent. It seemed to me that at that point I could
telephone Adele. She thanked me ironically for my concern, showed that she
was better informed than I was regarding the life and studies of Dede and Elsa,
uttered remarks like: This is a country where one is exposed to every insult,
respectable people should be in a hurry to emigrate. When I asked if I could say
hello to Guido she said: I’ll say it for you, he’s resting now. Then she exclaimed
bitterly: His only crime was to be surrounded by newly literate types with no
ethics, young arrivistes ready for anything, scum.
That very evening the television showed a particularly cheerful image of the
former socialist deputy Giovanni Sarratore—who was not exactly a youth, at
the time: he was fifty—and inserted him in the increasingly crowded list of
corrupters and corrupt.
40.
That news especially upset Imma. In those first years of her conscious life
she had seen her father very little, and yet had made him her idol. She boasted
of him to her schoolmates, she boasted to her teachers, she showed everyone a
photograph from the newspapers in which they were hand in hand right at the
entrance to Montecitorio. If she had to imagine the man she would marry, she
said: He will surely be very tall, dark, and handsome. When she learned that
her father had ended up in jail like an ordinary inhabitant of the neighborhood
—a place that she considered horrible: now that she was growing up she said in
no uncertain terms that she was afraid of it, and, increasingly, she had reason
to be—she lost the bit of serenity I had been able to guarantee her. She sobbed
in her sleep, she woke in the middle of the night and wanted to get in bed with
me.
Once we met Marisa, worn-out, shabby, angrier than usual. She said, paying
no attention to Imma: Nino deserves it, he’s always thought only of himself,
and, as you well know, he never wanted to give us any help, he acted like an
honest man only with his relatives, that piece of shit. My daughter couldn’t
bear even a word of it, she left us on the stradone and ran away. I quickly said
goodbye to Marisa, I chased after Imma, I tried to console her: You mustn’t pay
any  attention,  your  father  and  his  sister  never  got  along.  But  I  stopped
speaking critically of Nino in front of her. In fact I stopped speaking critically
of him in front of anyone. I remembered when I went to him to find out about
Pasquale  and  Enzo.  You  always  needed  some  patron  saint  in  Paradise  to
navigate the calculated opacity of the underworld, and Nino, although far from
any sanctity, had helped me. Now that the saints were falling into the inferno, I
had no one to ask to find out about him. Unreliable news came to me only from
the infernal circle of his many lawyers.
41.
Lila, I have to say, never showed any interest in Nino’s fate; she reacted to
the news of his legal troubles as if it were something to laugh about. She said,
with the expression of someone who has remembered a detail that explained
everything: Whenever he needed money he got Bruno Soccavo to give it to
him, and he certainly never paid it back. Then she muttered that she could
imagine what had happened to him. He had smiled, he had shaken hands, he
had felt he was the best of all, he had continuously wanted to demonstrate that
he was equal to any possible situation. If he had done something wrong he had
done it out of a desire to be more likable, to seem the most intelligent, to climb
higher and higher. That’s it. And later she acted as if Nino no longer existed. As
much  as  she  had  exerted  herself  for  Pasquale  and  Enzo,  so  she  appeared
completely indifferent to the problems of the former Honorable Sarratore. It’s
likely that she followed the proceedings in the papers and on television, where
Nino appeared often, pale, suddenly grizzled, with the expression of a child
who says: I swear it wasn’t me. Certainly she never asked me what I knew
about him, if I had managed to see him, what he expected, how his father, his
mother, his siblings had reacted. Instead, for no clear reason, her interest in
Imma was rekindled, she got involved with her again.
While she had abandoned her son Rino to me like a puppy who, having
grown fond of another mistress, no longer greets the old one, she became very
attached to my daughter again, and Imma, always greedy for affection, went
back to loving her. I saw them talking, and they often went out together. Lila
said to me: I showed her the botanic garden, the museum, Capodimonte.
In the last phase of our life in Naples, she guided Imma all over the city,
transmitting an interest in it that remained with her. Aunt Lina knows so many
things, Imma said in admiration. And I was pleased, because Lila, taking her
around on her wanderings, managed to diminish her anguish about her father,
the anger at the fierce insults of her classmates, prompted by their parents,
and the loss of the attention she had received from her teachers thanks to her
surname.  But  it  wasn’t  only  that.  I  learned  from  Imma’s  reports,  and  with
greater  and  greater  precision,  that  the  object  in  which  Lila’s  mind  was
engaged, and on which she was writing for perhaps hours and hours, bent over
her computer, was not this or that monument but Naples in its entirety. An
enormous project that she had never talked to me about. The time had passed
in  which  she  tended  to  involve  me  in  her  passions,  she  had  chosen  my
daughter as her confidante. To her she repeated the things she learned, or
dragged her to see what had excited or fascinated her.
42.
Imma was very receptive, and memorized everything rapidly. It was she who
taught me about Piazza dei Martiri, so important for Lila and me in the past. I
knew nothing about it, whereas Lila had studied its history and told her about
it.  She  repeated  it  to  me  right  in  the  piazza,  one  morning  when  we  went
shopping,  mixing  up,  I  think,  facts,  her  fantasies,  fantasies  of  Lila’s.  Here,
Mamma, in the eighteenth century it was all countryside. There were trees,
there were the peasants’ houses, inns, and a road that went straight down to
the sea called Calata Santa Caterina a Chiaia, from the name of the church
there at the corner, which is old but quite ugly. After May 15, 1848, when, right
in this spot, many patriots who wanted a constitution and a parliament were
killed,  the  Bourbon  King  Ferdinando  II,  to  show  that  peace  had  returned,
decided to construct a Road of Peace and put up in the piazza a column with a
Madonna at the top. But when the annexation of Naples by the Kingdom of
Italy was proclaimed and the Bourbon was driven out, the mayor Giuseppe
Colonna di Stigliano asked the sculptor Enrico Alvino to transform the column
with  the  Madonna  of  Peace  at  the  top  into  a  column  in  memory  of  the
Neapolitans who had died for freedom. So Enrico Alvino put at the base of the
column these four lions, which symbolized the great moments of revolution in
Naples: the lion of 1799, mortally wounded; the lion of the movements of 1820,
pierced by the sword but still biting the air; the lion of 1848, which represents
the force of the patriots subdued but not conquered; finally, the lion of 1859,
threatening and avenging. Then, Mamma, up there, instead of the Madonna of
Peace he put the bronze statue of a beautiful young woman, that is, Victory,
who is balanced on the world: that Victory holds the sword in her left hand
and in the right a garland for the Neapolitan citizens, martyrs for Freedom,
who, fallen in battle and on the gallows, avenged the people with their blood,
et cetera et cetera.
I  often  had  the  impression  that  Lila  used  the  past  to  make  Imma’s
tempestuous present normal. In the Neapolitan facts as she recounted them
there was always something terrible, disorderly, at the origin, which later took
the form of a beautiful building, a street, a monument, only to be forgotten, to
lose meaning, to decline, improve, decline, according to an ebb and flow that
was  by  its  nature  unpredictable,  made  of  waves,  flat  calm,  downpours,
cascades. The essential, in Lila’s scheme, was to ask questions. Who were the
martyrs, what did the lions mean, and when had the battles and the gallows
occured, and the Road of Peace, and the Madonna, and the Victory. The stories
were a lineup of the befores, the afters, the thens. Before elegant Chiaia, the
neighborhood  for  the  wealthy,  there  was  the  playa  cited  in  the  letters  of
Gregory, the swamps that went down to the beach and the sea, the wild forest
that crept up to the Vomero. Before the Risanamento, or cleanup, of the end of
the  nineteenth  century,  before  the  railroad  cooperatives,  there  was  an
unhealthy area, polluted in every stone, but also with quite a few splendid
monuments, swept away by the mania for tearing down under the pretense of
cleaning up. And one of the areas to be cleaned up had, for a very long time,
been called Vasto. Vasto was a place name that indicated the terrain between
Porta Capuana and Porta Nolana, and the neighborhood, once cleaned up, had
kept the name. Lila repeated that name—Vasto—she liked it, and Imma, too,
liked  it:  Vasto  and  Risanamento,  waste  and  good  health,  a  yearning  to  lay
waste, sack, ruin, gut, and a yearning to build, order, design new streets or
rename the old, for the purpose of consolidating new worlds and hiding old
evils, which, however, were always ready to exact their revenge.
In fact, before the Vasto was called Vasto and was in essence wasteland—
Aunt Lina recounted—there had been villas, gardens, fountains. In that very
place the Marchese di Vico had built a palace, with a garden, called Paradise.
The garden of Paradise was full of hidden water games, Mamma. The most
famous was a big white mulberry tree, which had a system of almost invisible
channels: water flowed through them, falling like rain from the branches or
coursing like a waterfall down the trunk. Understand? From the Paradise of the
Marchese di Vico to the Vasto of the Marchese del Vasto, to the Cleanup of
Mayor Nicola Amore, to the Vasto again, to further renaissances and so on at
that rate.
Ah,  what  a  city,  said  Aunt  Lina  to  my  daughter,  what  a  splendid  and
important city: here all languages are spoken, Imma, here everything was built
and everything was torn down, here the people don’t trust talk and are very
talkative,  here  is  Vesuvius  which  reminds  you  every  day  that  the  greatest
undertaking  of  powerful  men,  the  most  splendid  work,  can  be  reduced  to
nothing in a few seconds by the fire, and the earthquake, and the ash, and the
sea.
I  listened,  but  at  times  I  was  baffled.  Yes,  Imma  was  consoled  but  only
because  Lila  was  introducing  her  to  a  permanent  stream  of  splendors  and
miseries, a cyclical Naples where everything was marvelous and everything
became gray and irrational and everything sparkled again, as when a cloud
passes  over  the  sun  and  the  sun  appears  to  flee,  a  timid,  pale  disk,  near
extinction, but now look, once the cloud dissolves it’s suddenly dazzling again,
so bright you have to shield your eyes with your hand. In Lila’s stories the
palaces  with  paradisiacal  gardens  fell  into  ruin,  grew  wild,  and  sometimes
nymphs, dryads, satyrs, and fauns inhabited them, sometimes the souls of the
dead, sometimes demons whom God sent to the castles and also the houses of
common people to make them atone for their sins or to put to the test good-
hearted inhabitants, to reward them after death. What was beautiful and solid
and radiant was populated with nighttime imaginings, and they both liked
stories of shades. Imma informed me that at the cape of Posillipo, a few steps
from the sea, opposite Gajóla, just above the Grotta delle Fate, there was a
famous building inhabited by spirits. The spirits, she told me, were also in the
buildings of Vico San Mandato and Vico Mondragone. Lila had promised her
that they would go together to look in the streets of Santa Lucia for a spirit
called Faccione, called that because of his broad face, who was dangerous and
threw big stones at anyone who disturbed him. Also—she had told her—many
spirits of dead children lived in Pizzofalcone and other places. A child could
often be seen at night in the neighborhood of Porta Nolana. Did they really
exist, or did they not exist? Aunt Lina said that the spirits existed, but not in
the  palaces,  or  in  the  alleys,  or  near  the  ancient  gates  of  the  Vasto.  They
existed in people’s ears, in the eyes when the eyes looked inside and not out, in
the voice as soon as it begins to speak, in the head when it thinks, because
words are full of ghosts but so are images. Is it true, Mamma?
Yes, I answered, maybe yes: if Aunt Lina says so, it could be. This city is full
of events, both large and small—Lila had told her—you can even see spirits if
you go to the museum, the painting gallery, and, especially, the Biblioteca
Nazionale, there are a lot of them in the books. You open one and, for example,
Masaniello jumps out. Masaniello is a funny and terrible spirit, he makes the
poor laugh and the rich tremble. Imma liked it in particular when, with his
sword,  he  killed  not  the  duke  of  Maddaloni,  not  the  father  of  the  duke  of
Maddaloni, but their portraits, zac, zac, zac. In fact, in her opinion, the most
entertaining moment was when Masaniello cut off the heads of the duke and
his  father  in  the  portraits,  or  hanged  the  portraits  of  other  ferocious
noblemen. He cut off the heads in the portraits, Imma laughed, in disbelief, he
hanged the portraits. And after those decapitations and hangings Masaniello put
on an outfit of blue silk embroidered with silver, placed a gold chain around his
neck, stuck a diamond pin in his hat, and went to the market. He went like
that, Mamma, all decked out like a marquis, a duke, a prince, he who was a
workingman, a fisherman, and didn’t know how to read or write. Aunt Lina had
said that in Naples that could happen and other things, openly, without the
pretense of making laws and decrees and entire conditions better than the
previous ones. In Naples one could get carried away without subterfuges, with
clarity and complete satisfaction.
The story of a minister had made a great impression on her. It involved the
museum of our city, and Pompeii. Imma told me in a serious tone: You know,
Mamma,  that  a  Minister  of  Education,  Nasi,  a  representative  of  the  people
almost a hundred years ago, accepted as a gift from workers at the excavations
of Pompeii a small, valuable statue they had just dug up? You know that he had
models  made  of  the  best  artworks  found  at  Pompeii  to  adorn  his  villa  in
Trapani? This Nasi, Mamma, even though he was a Minister of the Kingdom of
Italy, acted instinctively: the workers brought him a beautiful little statue as a
gift and he took it, he thought it would make a very fine impression at his
house. Sometimes you make a mistake, but when as a child you haven’t been
taught what the public good is, you don’t understand what a crime is.
I don’t know if she said the last part because she was reporting the words of
Aunt Lina, or because she had made her own arguments. Anyway I didn’t like
those words and I decided to intervene. I made a cautious speech, but explicit:
Aunt  Lina  tells  you  so  many  wonderful  things,  I’m  pleased,  when  she  gets
excited  no  one  can  stop  her.  But  you  mustn’t  think  that  people  carry  out
terrible  acts  lightly.  You  mustn’t  believe  it,  Imma,  especially  if  it  concerns
members  of  parliament  and  ministers  and  senators  and  bankers  and
Camorrists. You mustn’t  believe that the  world is chasing  its tail—now it’s
going  well,  now  badly,  now  it’s  going  well  again.  We  have  to  work  with
consistency,  with  discipline,  step  by  step,  no  matter  how  things  are  going
around  us,  and  be  careful  not  to  make  a  mistake,  because  we  pay  for  our
mistakes.
Imma’s lower lip trembled, she asked me:
“Papa won’t go to parliament anymore?”
I didn’t know what to say and she realized it. As if to encourage me to give a
positive response, she said:
“Aunt Lina thinks so, that he’ll return.”
I hesitated, then made up my mind.
“No, Imma, I don’t think so. But there’s no need for Papa to be an important
person for you to love him.”
43.
It was the completely wrong answer. Nino, with his usual ability, slipped out
of the trap he had ended up in. Imma found out and was very pleased. She
asked to see him, but he disappeared for a while, it was difficult to track him
down. When we made a date he took us to a pizzeria in Mergellina, but he
didn’t display his usual liveliness. He was nervous, distracted, to Imma he said
one  should  never  rely  on  political  alignments,  he  described  himself  as  the
victim of a left that wasn’t a left, in fact it was worse than the fascists. You’ll
see—he reassured her—Papa will fix everything up.
Later I read some very aggressive articles of his in which he returned to a
thesis  that  he  had  espoused  long  ago:  legal  power  had  to  be  subject  to
executive power. He wrote indignantly: How can the judges one day be fighting
against those who want to strike at the heart of the state and the next make
the citizens believe that very same heart is sick and should be thrown out. He
fought not to be thrown out. He passed through the old parties now out of
commission, shifting further to the right, and in 1994, radiant, he regained a
seat in parliament.
Imma was joyful when she learned that her father was again the Honorable
Sarratore and that Naples had given him a very high number of preferences. As
soon as she heard the news she came to tell me: You write books but you can’t
see the future the way Aunt Lina does.
44.
I didn’t get angry with her, in essence my daughter wanted only to point out
to me that I had been spiteful about her father, that I hadn’t understood how
great he was. But those words (You write books but you can’t see the future the way
Aunt Lina does) had an unexpected function: they pushed me to pay attention to
the fact that Lila, the woman who in Imma’s opinion could see the future, at
fifty had returned officially to books, to studying, and was even writing. Pietro
had imagined that with that decision she had self-prescribed a kind of therapy
to  fight  the  anguishing  absence  of  Tina.  But  in  my  last  year  in  the
neighborhood I wasn’t satisfied with Pietro’s sensitivity or Imma’s mediation:
as soon as I could, I broached the subject, I asked questions.
“Why all this interest in Naples?”
“What’s wrong with it?”
“Nothing, in fact I envy you. You’re studying for your own pleasure, while I
now read and write only for work.”
“I’m not studying. I limit myself to seeing a building, a street, a monument,
and maybe I spend a little time looking for information, that’s all.”
“And that’s studying.”
“You think?”
She  was  evasive,  she  didn’t  want  to  confide  in  me.  But  sometimes  she
became excited, the way she could be, and began to speak of the city as if it
were not made up of the usual streets, of the normality of everyday places, but
had  revealed  only  to  her  a  secret  sparkle.  So  in  a  few  brief  sentences  she
transformed it into the most memorable place in the world, into the place
richest in meanings, and after a little conversation I returned to my things
with my mind on fire. What a grave negligence it had been to be born and live
in Naples without making an effort to know it. I was about to leave the city for
the second time, I had been there altogether for thirty full years of my life, and
yet of the place where I was born I knew almost nothing. Pietro, in the past,
had admonished me for my ignorance, now I admonished myself. I listened to
Lila and felt my insubstantiality.
Meanwhile, she, who learned with effortless speed, now seemed able to give
to every monument, every stone, a density of meaning, a fantastic importance
such that I would have happily stopped the nonsense that I was busy with to
start studying in turn. But “the nonsense” absorbed all my energy, thanks to it
I lived comfortably, I usually worked even at night. Sometimes in the silent
apartment I stopped, I thought that perhaps at that moment Lila, too, was
awake, maybe she was writing like me, maybe summarizing texts she’d read in
the library, maybe putting down her reflections, maybe she moved on from
there to recount episodes of her own, maybe the historic truth didn’t interest
her, she sought only starting points from which to let imagination wander.
Certainly she proceeded in her usual extemporaneous way, with unexpected
interests that later weakened and vanished. Now, as far as I could tell, she was
concerned with the porcelain factory near the Palazzo Reale. Now she was
gathering information on San Pietro a Majella. Now she sought testimonies of
foreign  travelers  in  which  it  seemed  to  her  she  could  trace  a  mixture  of
attraction and repulsion. Everyone, she said, everyone, century after century,
praised the great port, the sea, the ships, the castles, Vesuvius tall and black
with  its  disdainful  flames,  the  city  like  an  amphitheater,  the  gardens,  the
orchards, the palaces. But then, century after century, they began to complain
about  the  inefficiency,  the  corruption,  the  physical  and  moral  poverty.  No
institution—behind the façade, behind the pompous name and the numerous
employees—truly  functioned.  No  decipherable  order,  only  an  unruly  and
uncontrollable crowd on streets cluttered with sellers of every possible type of
merchandise, people speaking at the top of their lungs, urchins, beggars. Ah,
there is no city that gives off so much noise and such a clamor as Naples.
Once she talked to me about violence. We believed, she said, that it was a
feature of the neighborhood. We had it around us from birth, it brushed up
against  us,  touched  us  all  our  lives,  we  thought:  we  were  unlucky.  You
remember how we used words to cause suffering, and how many we invented
to humiliate? You remember the beatings that Antonio, Enzo, Pasquale, my
brother, the Solaras, and even I, and even you, gave and took? You remember
when my father threw me out the window? Now I’m reading an old article on
San Giovanni a Carbonara, where it explains what the Carbonara or Carboneto
was. I thought that there was coal there once, and coal miners. But no, it was
the place for the garbage, all cities have them. It was called Fosso Carbonario,
dirty water ran in it, animal carcasses were tossed into it. And since ancient
times the Fosso Carbonario of Naples was where the church of San Giovanni a
Carbonara stands today. In the area called Piazza di Carbonara the poet Virgil
in his time ordered that every year the ioco de Carbonara take place, gladiator
games that didn’t lead to the death of men, as they did later—morte de homini
come de po è facto (she liked that old Italian, it amused her, she quoted it to me
with visible pleasure)—but gave men practice in deeds of arms: li homini ali facti
de l’arme. Soon, however, it wasn’t a matter of ioco or practice. In that place
where they threw out beasts and garbage a lot of human blood was shed. It
seems  that  the  game  of  throwing  the  prete  was  invented  there,  the  stone
throwing  that  we  did  as  girls,  you  remember,  when  Enzo  hit  me  in  the
forehead—I still have the scar—and he was desperate and gave me a garland of
sorb apples. But then, in Piazza di Carbonara, from stones she moved on to
weapons, and it became the place where men fought to the last drop of blood.
Beggars and gentlemen and princes hurried to see people killing each other in
revenge. When some handsome youth fell, pierced by a blade beaten on the
anvil  of  death,  immediately  beggars,  bourgeois  citizens,  kings  and  queens
offered  applause  that  rose  to  the  stars.  Ah,  the  violence:  tearing,  killing,
ripping. Lila, between fascination and horror, spoke to me in a mixture of
dialect, Italian, and very educated quotations that she had taken from who
knows where and remembered by heart. The entire planet, she said, is a big
Fosso Carbonario. And at times I thought that she could have held crowded
rooms fascinated, but then I brought her down to size. She’s a barely educated
woman of fifty, she doesn’t know how to do research, she doesn’t know what
the  documentary  truth  is:  she  reads,  she  is  excited,  she  mixes  truth  and
falsehood, she imagines. No more. What seemed to interest and absorb her
most was that all that filth, all that chaos of broken limbs and dug-out eyes and
split heads was then covered—literally covered—by a church dedicated to San
Giovanni  Battista  and  by  a  monastery  of  Augustinian  hermits  who  had  a
valuable library. Ah, ah—she laughed—underneath there’s blood and above,
God, peace, prayer, and books. Thus the coupling of San Giovanni and the Fosso
Carbonario, that is to say the place name of San Giovanni a Carbonara: a street
we’ve walked on thousands of times, Lenù, it’s near the station, near Forcella
and the Tribunali.
I knew where the street of San Giovanni a Carbonara was, I knew it very
well, but I didn’t know those stories. She talked about it at length. She talked so
as to let me know—I suspected—that the things she was telling me orally she
had  in  substance  already  written,  and  they  belonged  to  a  vast  text  whose
structure, however, escaped me. I wondered: what does she have in mind, what
are her intentions? Is she just organizing her wandering and readings or is she
planning a book of Neapolitan curiosities, a book that, naturally, she’ll never
finish but that it’s good for her to keep working on, day after day, now that not
only Tina is gone but Enzo is gone, the Solaras are gone, I, too, am going, taking
away Imma, who, one way and another, has helped her survive?
45.
Shortly before I left for Turin I spent a lot of time with her, we had an
affectionate farewell. It was a summer day in 1995. We talked about everything,
for hours, but finally she focused on Imma, who was now fourteen; she was
pretty, and lively, and had just graduated from middle school. She praised her
without sudden malice, and I listened to her praise, I thanked her for helping
her at a difficult time. She looked at me in bafflement, she corrected me:
“I’ve always helped Imma, not just now.”
“Yes, but after Nino’s troubles you were really helpful to her.”
She didn’t like those words, either, it was a moment of confusion. She didn’t
want me to associate with Nino the attention she had devoted to Imma, she
reminded me that she had taken care of the child from the start, she said she
had done it because Tina loved her dearly, she added: Maybe Tina loved Imma
even more than me. Then she shook her head in discontent.
“I don’t understand you,” she said.
“What don’t you understand?”
She became nervous, she had something in mind that she wanted to tell me
but restrained herself.
“I don’t understand how it’s possible that in all this time you never thought
of it even once.”
“Of what, Lila?”
She was silent for a few seconds, then spoke, eyes down.
“You remember the photograph in Panorama?”
“Which one?”
“The one where you were with Tina and the caption said that it was you and
your daughter.”
“Of course I remember.”
“I’ve often thought that they might have taken Tina because of that photo.”
“What?”
“They  thought  they  were  stealing  your  daughter,  and  instead  they  stole
mine.”
She  said  it,  and  that  morning  I  had  the  proof  that  of  all  the  infinite
hypotheses, the fantasies, the obsessions that had tormented her, that still
tormented her, I had perceived almost nothing. A decade hadn’t served to calm
her, her brain couldn’t find a quiet corner for her daughter. She said:
“You were always in the newspapers and on television, beautiful, elegant,
blond: maybe they wanted money from you and not from me, who knows, I
don’t  know  anything  anymore,  things  go  one  way  and  then  they  change
direction.”
She said that Enzo had talked to the police, that she had talked about it with
Antonio, but neither the police nor Antonio had taken the possibility seriously.
Yet she spoke to me as if at that moment she were again sure that that was
what had happened. Who knows what else she had brooded over and was still
brooding over that I hadn’t realized. Nunziatina had been taken in place of my
Immacolata? My success was responsible for the kidnapping of her daughter?
And that bond of hers with Imma was an anxiety, a protection, a safeguard?
She imagined that the kidnappers, having thrown away the wrong child, would
return to get the right one? Or what else? What had passed and was passing
through her mind? Why was she talking to me about this only now? Did she
want  to  inject  in  me  a  final  poison  to  punish  me  for  leaving  her?  Ah,  I
understood why Enzo had left. Living with her had become too harrowing.
She realized that I was looking at her with concern and, as if to reach safety,
began to speak about what she was reading. But now in a jumbled way; her
unease  contorted  her  features.  She  muttered,  laughing,  that  evil  took
unpredictable pathways. You cover it over with churches, convents, books—
they seem so important, the books, she said sarcastically, you’ve devoted your
whole life to them—and the evil breaks through the floor and emerges where
you don’t expect it. Then she calmed down and began to speak again of Tina,
Imma, me, but in a conciliatory way, as if apologizing for what she had said to
me. When there’s too much silence, she said, so many ideas come to mind, I
don’t pay attention. Only in bad novels people always think the right thing,
always say the right thing, every effect has its cause, there are the likable ones
and the unlikable, the good and the bad, everything in the end consoles you.
She whispered: It might be that Tina will return tonight and then who gives a
damn how it happened, the essential thing will be that she’s here again and
forgives me for the distraction. You forgive me, too, she said, and, embracing
me, concluded: Go, go, do better things than you’ve done so far. I’ve stayed
near Imma also out of fear that someone might take her, and you loved my son
truly also when your daughter left him. How many things you’ve endured for
him, thank you. I’m so glad we’ve been friends for so long and that we are still.
46.
The idea that Tina had been taken in the belief that she was my daughter
upset me, but not because I considered that it had some foundation. I thought
rather of the tangle of obscure feelings that had generated it, and I tried to put
them  in  order.  I  even  remembered,  after  so  long,  that  for  completely
coincidental reasons—under the most insignificant coincidences expanses of
quicksand lie hidden—Lila had given her daughter the name of my beloved
doll, the one that, as a child, she herself had thrown into a cellar. It was the
first time, I recall, that I fantasized about it, but I couldn’t stand it for long, I
looked into a dark well with a few glimmers of light and drew back. Every
intense relationship between human beings is full of traps, and if you want it to
endure you have to learn to avoid them. I did so then, and finally it seemed
that  I  had  only  come  up  against  yet  another  proof  of  how  splendid  and
shadowy our friendship was, how long and complicated Lila’s suffering had
been,  how  it  still  endured  and  would  endure  forever.  But  I  went  to  Turin
conviced that Enzo was right: Lila was very far from a quiet old age within the
confines she had established for herself. The last image she gave me of herself
was that of a woman of fifty-one who looked ten years older and who from
time to time, as she spoke, was hit by waves of heat, and turned fiery red.
There were patches on her neck, too, her gaze dimmed, she grabbed the edge
of her dress with her hands and fanned herself, showing Imma and me her
underwear.
47.
In  Turin  now  everything  was  ready:  I  had  found  an  apartment  near  the
Isabella bridge and had worked hard to get most of my things and Imma’s
moved. We departed. The train, I remember, had just left Naples, my daughter
was sitting across from me, and for the first time she seemed sad about what
she was leaving behind. I was very tired from the traveling back and forth of
the past months, from the thousands of things I had had to arrange, from what
I had done, from what I had forgotten to do. I collapsed against the seat back, I
looked out the window at the outskirts of the city and Vesuvius as they grew
distant. Just at that moment the certainty sprang to mind that Lila, writing
about Naples, would write about Tina, and the text—precisely because it was
nourished  by  the  effort  of  expressing  an  inexpressible  grief—would  be
extraordinary.
That certainty took hold forcefully and  never weakened. In the years  of
Turin—as long as I ran the small but promising publishing house that had hired
me, as long as I felt much more respected, I would say in fact more powerful,
than Adele had been in my eyes decades earlier—the certainty took the form of
a wish, a hope. I would have liked Lila to call me one day and say: I have a
manuscript, a notebook, a zibaldone, in other words a text of mine that I’d like
you to read and help me arrange. I would have read it immediately. I would
have worked to give it a proper form, probably, passage by passage, I would
have  ended  up  rewriting  it.  Lila,  in  spite  of  her  intellectual  liveliness,  her
extraordinary memory, the reading she must have done all her life, at times
talking  to  me  about  it,  more  often  hiding  it  from  me,  had  an  absolutely
inadequate basic education and no skill as a narrator. I was afraid it would be a
disorderly accumulation of good things badly formulated, splendid things put
in the wrong place. But it never occurred to me—never—that she might write
an inane little story, full of clichés, in fact I was absolutely sure that it would be
a worthy text. In the periods when I was struggling to put together an editorial
plan of a high standard, I even went so far as to urgently interrogate Rino, who,
for one thing, showed up frequently at my house; he would arrive without
calling, say I came to say hello, and stay at least a couple of weeks. I asked him:
Is your mother still writing? Have you ever happened to take a look, to see
what it is? But he said yes, no, I don’t remember, it’s her business, I don’t know.
I insisted. I fantasized about the series in which I would put that phantom text,
about what I would do to give it the maximum visibility and get some prestige
from it myself. Occasionally I called Lila, I asked how she was, I questioned her
discreetly, sticking to generalities: Do you still have your passion for Naples,
are you taking more notes? She automatically responded: What passion, what
notes, I’m a crazy old woman like Melina, you remember Melina, who knows if
she’s still alive. Then I dropped the subject, we moved on to other things.
48.
In the course of those phone calls we spoke more and more frequently of the
dead, which was an occasion to mention the living, too.
Her father, Fernando, had died, and a few months later Nunzia died. Lila
then moved with Rino to the old apartment where she was born and that she
had bought long ago with her own money. But now the other siblings claimed
that it was the property of her parents and harassed her by claiming rights to a
part of it.
Stefano had died after another heart attack—they hadn’t had time even to
call an ambulance, he had fallen facedown on the ground—and Marisa had left
the neighborhood, with her children. Nino had finally done something for her.
Not only had he found her a job as a secretary in a law firm on Via Crispi but he
gave her money to support her children at the university.
A man I had never met but who was known to be the lover of my sister, Elisa,
had died. She had left the neighborhood but neither she nor my father nor my
brothers had told me. I found out from Lila that she had gone to Caserta, had
met a lawyer who was also a city councilman, and had remarried, but hadn’t
invited me to the wedding.
We talked about things like this, she kept me updated on all the news. I told
her about my daughters, about Pietro, who had married a colleague five years
older than he, of what I was writing, of how my publishing experience was
going.  Only  a  couple  of  times  did  I  go  so  far  as  to  ask  somewhat  explicit
questions on the subject important to me.
“If you, let’s say, were to write something—it’s a hypothesis—would you let
me read it?”
“What sort of something?”
“Something. Rino says you’re always at the computer.”
“Rino  talks  nonsense.  I’m  going  on  the  Internet.  I’m  finding  out  new
information  about  electronics.  That’s  what  I’m  doing  when  I’m  at  the
computer.”
“Really?”
“Of course. Do I never respond to your e-mails?”
“No, and you make me mad: I always write to you and you write nothing.”
“You see? I write nothing to no one, not even to you.”
“All right. but if you should write something, you’d let me read it, you’d let
me publish it?”
“You’re the writer.”
“You didn’t answer me.”
“I did answer you, but you pretend not to understand. To write, you have to
want something to survive you. I don’t even have the desire to live, I’ve never
had it strongly the way you have. If I could eliminate myself now, while we’re
speaking, I’d be more than happy. Imagine if I’m going to start writing.”
She had often expressed that idea of eliminating herself, but, starting in the
late nineties—and especially from 2000 on—it became a sort of teasing chorus.
It was a metaphor, of course. She liked it, she had resorted to it in the most
diverse circumstances, and it never occurred to me, in the many years of our
friendship—not  even  in  the  most  terrible  moments  following  Tina’s
disappearance—that she would think of suicide. Eliminating herself was a sort
of aesthetic project. One can’t go on anymore, she said, electronics seems so
clean and yet it dirties, dirties tremendously, and it obliges you to leave traces
of  yourself  everywhere  as  if  you  were  shitting  and  peeing  on  yourself
continuously: I want to leave nothing, my favorite key is the one that deletes.
That  yearning  had  been  more  true  in  some  periods,  in  others  less.  I
remember a malicious tirade that started with my fame. Eh, she said once,
what a fuss for a name: famous or not, it’s only a ribbon tied around a sack
randomly filled with blood, flesh, words, shit, and petty thoughts. She mocked
me at length on that point: I untie the ribbon—Elena Greco—and the sack stays
there, it functions just the same, haphazardly, of course, without virtues or
vices, until it breaks. On her darkest days she said with a bitter laugh: I want to
untie my name, slip it off me, throw it away, forget it. But on other occasions
she  was  more  relaxed.  It  happened—let’s  say—that  I  called  her  hoping  to
persuade her to talk to me about her text and, although she forcefully denied
its existence, continuing to be evasive, it sounded as if my phone call had
surprised her in the middle of a creative moment. One evening I found her
happily dazed. She made the usual speech about annihilating all hierarchies—
So much fuss about the greatness of this one and that one, but what virtue is there in
being born with certain qualities, it’s like admiring the bingo basket when you shake it
and good numbers come out—but she expressed herself with imagination and
with precision, I perceived the pleasure of inventing images. Ah, how she could
use words when she wanted to. She seemed to safeguard a secret meaning that
took meaning away from everything else. Perhaps it was that which began to
sadden me.
49.
The crisis arrived in the winter of 2002. At that time, in spite of the ups and
downs, I again felt fulfilled. Every year Dede and Elsa returned from the United
States, sometimes alone, sometimes with temporary boyfriends. The first was
involved in the same things as her father, the second had precociously won a
professorship in a very mysterious area of algebra. When her sisters returned
Imma freed herself of every obligation and spent all her time with them. The
family came together again, we were four women in the house in Turin, or out
in the city, happy to be together at least for a short period, attentive to one
another, affectionate. I looked at them and said to myself: How lucky I’ve been.
But at Christmas of 2002 something happened that depressed me. The three
girls all returned for a long period. Dede had married a serious engineer of
Iranian origin, she had a very energetic two-year-old named Hamid. Elsa came
with  one  of  her  colleagues  from  Boston,  also  a  mathematician,  even  more
youthful, and rowdy. Imma returned from Paris, where she had been studying
philosophy  for  two  years,  and  brought  a  classmate,  a  tall,  not  very  good-
looking, and almost silent Frenchman. How pleasant that December was. I was
fifty-eight, a grandmother, I cuddled Hamid. I remember that on Christmas
evening I was in a corner with the baby and looking serenely at the young
bodies of my daughters, charged with energy. They all resembled me and none
of  them  did,  their  lives  were  very  far  from  mine  and  yet  I  felt  them  as
inseparable parts of me. I thought: how much work I’ve done and what a long
road I’ve traveled. At every step I could have given in and yet I didn’t. I left the
neighborhood, I returned, I managed to leave again. Nothing, nothing pulled
me down, along with these girls I produced. We’re safe, I brought them all to
safety. Oh, they now belong to other places and other languages. They consider
Italy a splendid corner of the planet and, at the same time, an insignificant and
ineffectual province, habitable only for a short vacation. Dede often says to me:
Leave, come and stay in my house, you can do your work from there. I say yes,
sooner or later I will. They’re proud of me and yet I know that none of them
would tolerate me for long, not even Imma by now. The world has changed
tremendously and belongs more and more to them, less and less to me. But
that’s all right—I said to myself, caressing Hamid—in the end what counts is
these very smart girls who haven’t encountered a single one of the difficulties I
faced.  They  have  habits,  voices,  requirements,  entitlements,  self-awareness
that even today I wouldn’t dare allow myself. Others haven’t had the same
luck. In the wealthier countries a mediocrity that hides the horrors of the rest
of the world has prevailed. When those horrors release a violence that reaches
into our cities and our habits we’re startled, we’re alarmed. Last year I was
dying of fear and I made long phone calls to Dede, to Elsa, even to Pietro, when
I saw on television the planes that set the towers in New York ablaze the way
you  light  a  match  by  gently  striking  the  head.  In  the  world  below  is  the
inferno.  My  daughters  know  it  but  only  through  words,  and  they  become
indignant, all the time enjoying the pleasures of existence, while it lasts. They
attribute their well-being and their success to their father. But I—I who did not
have privileges—am the foundation of their privileges.
While I was reasoning like this, something depressed me. I suppose it was
when the three girls led the men playfully to the shelf that held my books.
Probably none of them had ever read one, certainly I had never seen them do
so, nor had they ever said anything to me about them. But now they were
paging  through  them,  they  even  read  some  sentences  aloud.  Those  books
originated in the climate in which I had lived, in what had influenced me, in
the  ideas  that  had  impressed  me.  I  had  followed  my  time,  step  by  step,
inventing  stories,  reflecting.  I  had  pointed  out  evils,  I  had  staged  them.
Countless times I had anticipated redemptive changes that had never arrived. I
had  used  the  language  of  every  day  to  indicate  things  of  every  day.  I  had
stressed certain themes: work, class conflicts, feminism, the marginalized. Now
I was hearing my sentences chosen at random and they seemed embarrassing.
Elsa—Dede was more respectful, Imma more cautious—was reading in an ironic
tone  from  my  first  novel,  she  read  from  the  story  about  the  invention  of
women by men, she read from books with many prizes. Her voice skillfully
highlighted  flaws,  excesses,  tones  that  were  too  exclamatory,  the  aged
ideologies that I had supported as indisputable truths. Above all she paused
with amusement on the vocabulary, she repeated two or three times words
that had long since passed out of fashion and sounded foolish. What was I
witnessing? An affectionate mockery in the Neapolitan manner—certainly my
daughter  had  learned  that  tone  there—which,  however,  line  by  line,  was
becoming a demonstration of the scant value of all those volumes, sitting there
along with their translations?
Elsa’s  friend  the  young  mathematician  was  the  only  one,  I  think,  who
realized that my daughter was hurting me and he interrupted her, took away
the  book,  asked  me  questions  about  Naples  as  if  it  were  a  city  of  the
imagination, similar to those which the most intrepid explorers brought news
of. The holiday slipped away. But something inside me changed. Occasionally I
took  down  one  of  my  volumes,  read  a  few  pages,  felt  its  fragility.  My  old
uncertainties gained strength. I increasingly doubted the quality of my works.
Lila’s hypothetical text, in parallel, assumed an unforeseen value. If before I
had thought of it as a raw material on which I could work with her, shaping it
into  a  good  book  for  my  publishing  house,  now  it  was  transformed  into  a
completed  work  and  so  into  a  possible  touchstone.  I  was  surprised  to  ask
myself: and if sooner or later a story much better than mine emerges from her
files? If I have never, in fact, written a memorable novel and she, she, on the
other hand, has been writing and rewriting one for years? If the genius that
Lila had expressed as a child in The Blue Fairy, disturbing Maestra Oliviero, is
now, in old age, manifesting all its power? In that case her book would become
—even only for me—the proof of my failure, and reading it I would understand
how I should have written but had been unable to. At that point, the stubborn
self-discipline, the laborious studies, every page or line that I had published
successfully would vanish as when a storm arriving over the sea collides with
the violet line of the horizon and blots out everything. My image as a writer
who had emerged from a blighted place and gained success, esteem, would
reveal its insubstantiality. My satisfactions would diminish: with my daughters
who had turned out well, with my fame, even with my most recent lover, a
professor at the Polytechnic, eight years younger than me, twice divorced,
with a son, whom I saw once a week in his house in the hills. My entire life
would be reduced merely to a petty battle to change my social class.
50.
I kept depression at bay, I called Lila less. Now I no longer hoped, but feared,
feared she would say: Do you want to read these pages I’ve written, I’ve been
working for years, I’ll send them by e-mail. I had no doubts about how I would
react if I discovered that she really had irrupted into my professional identity,
emptying it. I would certainly remain admiring, as I had with The Blue Fairy. I
would publish her text without hesitation. I would exert myself to make it
successful in every way possible. But I was no longer that little being who had
had  to  discover  the  extraordinary  qualities  of  her  classmate.  Now  I  was  a
mature woman with an established profile. I was what Lila herself, sometimes
joking, sometimes serious, had often repeated: Elena Greco, the brilliant friend
of Raffaella Cerullo. From that unexpected reversal of destinies I would emerge
annihilated.
But  in  that  phase  things  were  still  going  well  for  me.  A  full  life,  a  still
youthful appearance, the obligations of work, a reassuring fame didn’t leave
much room for those thoughts, reduced them to a vague uneasiness. Then
came the bad years. My books sold less. I no longer had my position in the
publishing house. I gained weight, I lost my figure, I felt old and frightened by
the possibility of an old age of poverty, without fame. I had to acknowledge
that, while I was working according to the mental approach I had imposed
decades earlier, everything was different now, including me.
In 2005 I went to Naples, I saw Lila. It was a difficult day. She was further
changed, she tried to be sociable, she neurotically greeted everyone, she talked
too  much.  Seeing  Africans,  Asians  in  every  corner  of  the  neighborhood,
smelling the odors of unknown cuisines, she became excited, she said: I haven’t
traveled around the world like you, but, look, the world has come to me. In
Turin by now it was the same, and I liked the invasion of the exotic, how it had
been reduced to the everyday. Yet only in the neighborhood did I realize how
the anthropological landscape had altered. The old dialect had immediately
taken  in,  according  to  an  established  tradition,  mysterious  languages,  and
meanwhile it was dealing with different phonic abilities, with syntaxes and
sentiments that had once been very distant. The gray stone of the buildings
had unexpected signs, old trafficking, legal and illegal, was mixed with new,
the practice of violence opened up to new cultures.
That was when the news spread of Gigliola’s corpse in the gardens. At the
time we still didn’t know that she had died of a heart attack, I thought she had
been murdered. Her body, supine on the ground, was enormous. How she must
have suffered from that transformation, she who had been beautiful and had
caught the handsome Michele Solara. I am still alive—I thought—and yet I can’t
feel any different from that big body lying lifeless in that sordid place, in that
sordid way. It was so. Although I paid excessive attention to my appearance, I
no  longer  recognized  myself,  either:  I  moved  more  hesitantly,  my  physical
expression was not what I had been used to for decades. As a girl I had felt so
different and now I realized that I was like Gigliola.
Lila,  on  the  other  hand,  seemed  not  to  notice  old  age.  She  moved  with
energy, she shouted, she greeted people with expansive gestures. I didn’t ask
her, yet again, about her possible text. Whatever she said I was certain that it
wouldn’t reassure me. I didn’t know how to get out of this depression, what to
hold on to. The problem was no longer Lila’s work, or its quality, or at least I
didn’t need to be aware of that threat to feel that everything I had written,
since the end of the sixties, had lost weight and force, no longer spoke to an
audience as it seemed to me it had done for decades, had no readers. Rather, on
that  melancholy  occasion  of  death,  I  realized  that  the  very  nature  of  my
anguish had changed. Now I was distressed that nothing of me would endure
through time. My books had come out quickly and with their minor success
had for decades given me the illusion of being engaged in meaningful work.
But suddenly the illusion faded, I could no longer believe in the importance of
my work. On the other hand, for Lila, too, everything had passed by: she led an
obscure life; shut up in her parents’ small apartment, she filled the computer
with impressions and thoughts. And yet, I imagined, there was the possibility
that her name—whether it was just a ribbon or not—now that she was an old
woman, or even after her death, would be bound to a single work of great
significance: not the thousands of pages that I had written, but a book whose
success  she  would  never  enjoy,  as  I  instead  had  done  with  mine,  yet  that
nevertheless would endure through time and would be read and reread for
hundreds of years. Lila had that possibility, I had squandered it. My fate was no
different from Gigliola’s, hers might be.
51.
For a while I let myself go. I did very little work, but then again, neither the
publisher nor anyone else asked me to work more. I saw no one, I only made
long phone calls to my daughters, insisting that they put the children on, and I
spoke to them in baby talk. Now Elsa, too, had a boy, named Conrad, and Dede
had given Hamid a sister, whom she had called Elena.
Those childish voices which expressed themselves with such precision made
me think of Tina again. In the moments of greatest darkness I was sure that
Lila had written the detailed story of her daughter, sure that she had mixed it
into the history of Naples with the arrogant naïveté of the uneducated person
who,  perhaps  for  that  very  reason,  obtains  tremendous  results.  Then  I
understood that it was a fantasy of mine. Without wanting to, I was adding
apprehension to envy, bitterness, and affection. Lila didn’t have that type of
ambition, she had never had ambitions. To carry out any project to which you
attach your own name you have to love yourself, and she had told me, she
didn’t love herself, she loved nothing about herself. On the evenings of greatest
depression I went so far as to imagine that she had lost her daughter in order
not  to  see  herself  reproduced,  in  all  her  antipathy,  in  all  her  malicious
reactivity, in all her intelligence without purpose. She wanted to eliminate
herself, cancel all the traces, because she couldn’t tolerate herself. She had
done it continuously, for her entire existence, ever since she had shut herself
off within a suffocating perimeter, confining herself at a time when the planet
wanted to eliminate borders. She had never gotten on a train, not even to go to
Rome. She had never taken a plane. Her experience was extremely limited, and
when I thought about it I felt sorry for her, I laughed, I got up with a groan, I
went to the computer, I wrote yet another e-mail saying: Come and see me,
we’ll be together for a while. At those moments I took it for granted that there
was not and never would be a manuscript of Lila’s. I had always overestimated
her, nothing memorable would emerge from her—something that reassured
me and yet truly upset me. I loved Lila. I wanted her to last. But I wanted it to
be I who made her last. I thought it was my task. I was convinced that she
herself, as a girl, had assigned it to me.
52.
The story that I later called A Friendship originated in that mildly depressive
state, in Naples, during a week of rain. Of course I knew that I was violating an
unwritten  agreement  between  Lila  and  me,  I  also  knew  that  she  wouldn’t
tolerate it. But I thought that if the result was good, in the end she would say:
I’m grateful to you, these were things I didn’t have the courage to say even to
myself, and you said them in my name. There is this presumption, in those who
feel destined for art and above all literature: we act as if we had received an
investiture, but in fact no one has ever invested us with anything, it is we who
have authorized ourselves to be authors and yet we are resentful if others say:
This little thing you did doesn’t interest me, in fact it bores me, who gave you
the right. Within a few days I wrote a story that over the years, hoping and
fearing that Lila was writing it, I had imagined in every detail. I did it because
everything that came from her, or that I ascribed to her, had seemed to me,
since we were children, more meaningful, more promising, than what came
from me.
When I finished the first draft I was in a hotel room with a balcony that had
a beautiful view of Vesuvius and the gray semicircle of the city. I could have
called Lila on the cell phone, said to her: I’ve written about me, about you,
about Tina, about Imma, do you want to read it, it’s only eighty pages, I’ll come
by your house, I’ll read it aloud. I didn’t do that out of fear. She had explicitly
forbidden me not only to write about her but also to use persons and episodes
of the neighborhood. When I had, she always found a way of telling me—even if
painfully—that the book was bad, that either one is capable of telling things
just  as  they  happened,  in  teeming  chaos,  or  one  works  from  imagination,
inventing a thread, and I had been able to do neither the first thing nor the
second. So I let it go, I calmed myself, saying: it will happen as it always does,
she won’t like the story, she’ll pretend it doesn’t matter, in a few years she’ll
make it known to me, or tell me clearly, that I have to try to achieve more. In
truth, I thought, if it were up to her I would never publish a line.
The book came out, I was swept up by a success I hadn’t felt for a long time,
and since I needed it I was happy. A Friendship kept me from joining the list of
writers whom everyone considers dead even when they’re still alive. The old
books began to sell again, interest in me was rekindled, in spite of approaching
old age life became full again. But that book, which at first I considered the
best  I  had  written,  I  later  did  not  love.  It’s  Lila  who  made  me  hate  it,  by
refusing in every possible way to see me, to discuss it with me, even to insult
me and hit me. I called her constantly, I wrote endless e-mails, I went to the
neighborhood, I talked to Rino. She was never there. And on the other hand
her son never said: My mother is acting like this because she doesn’t want to
see you. As usual he was vague, he stammered: You know how she is, she’s
always out, she either turns off the cell phone or forgets it at home, sometimes
she  doesn’t  even  come  home  to  sleep.  So  I  had  to  acknowledge  that  our
friendship was over.
53.
In  fact  I  don’t  know  what  offended  her,  a  detail,  or  the  whole  story.  A
Friendship had the quality, in my opinion, of being linear. It told concisely, with
the necessary disguises, the story of our lives, from the loss of the dolls to the
loss of Tina. Where had I gone wrong? I thought for a long time that she was
angry because, in the final part, although resorting to imagination more than
at other points of the story, I related what in fact had happened in reality: Lila
had  given  Imma  more  importance  in  Nino’s  eyes,  in  doing  so  had  been
distracted, and as a result lost Tina. But evidently what in the fiction of the
story  serves  in  all  innocence  to  reach  the  heart  of  the  reader  becomes  an
abomination for one who feels the echo of the facts she has really lived. In
other words I thought for a long time that what had assured the book’s success
was also what had hurt Lila most.
Later, however, I changed my mind. I’m convinced that the reason for her
repudiation lay elsewhere, in the way I recounted the episode of the dolls. I
had  deliberately  exaggerated  the  moment  when  they  disappeared  into  the
darkness  of  the  cellar,  I  had  accentuated  the  trauma  of  the  loss,  and  to
intensify the emotional effects I had used the fact that one of the dolls and the
lost  child  had  the  same  name.  The  whole  led  the  reader,  step  by  step,  to
connect the childhood loss of the pretend daughters to the adult loss of the
real daughter. Lila must have found it cynical, dishonest, that I had resorted to
an important moment of our childhood, to her child, to her sorrow, to satisfy
my audience.
But I am merely piecing together hypotheses, I would have to confront her,
hear her protests, explain myself. Sometimes I feel guilty, and I understand
her. Sometimes I hate her for this decision to cut me off so sharply right now,
in old age, when we are in need of closeness and solidarity. She has always
acted like that: when I don’t submit, see how she excludes me, punishes me,
ruins even my pleasure in having written a good book. I’m exasperated. Even
this  staging  of  her  own  disappearance,  besides  worrying  me,  irritates  me.
Maybe little Tina has nothing to do with it, maybe not even her ghost, which
continues to obsess Lila both in the more enduring form of the child of nearly
four, and in the labile form of the woman who today, like Imma, would be
thirty. It’s only and always the two of us who are involved: she who wants me
to give what her nature and circumstances kept her from giving, I who can’t
give what she demands; she who gets angry at my inadequacy and out of spite
wants  to  reduce  me  to  nothing,  as  she  has  done  with  herself,  I  who  have
written  for  months  and  months  and  months  to  give  her  a  form  whose
boundaries won’t dissolve, and defeat her, and calm her, and so in turn calm
myself.
E
PILOGUE
Restitution
1.
I can’t believe it myself. I’ve finished this story that I thought would never
end. I finished it and patiently reread it not so much to improve the quality of
the writing as to find out if there are even a few lines where it’s possible to
trace  the  evidence  that  Lila  entered  my  text  and  decided  to  contribute  to
writing it. But I have had to acknowledge that all these pages are mine alone.
What Lila often threatened to do—enter my computer—she hasn’t done, maybe
she wasn’t even capable of doing, it was long a fantasy I had as an old woman
inexperienced in networks, cables, connections, electronic spirits. Lila is not in
these  words.  There  is  only  what  I’ve  been  able  to  put  down.  Unless,  by
imagining what she would write and how, I am no longer able to distinguish
what’s mine and what’s hers.
Often, during this work, I telephoned Rino, I asked about his mother. He
doesn’t know anything, the police limited themselves to summoning him three
or four times to show him the bodies of nameless old women—so many of them
disappear. A couple of times I had to go to Naples, and I met him in the old
apartment in the neighborhood, a space darker, more run-down than it had
been. There really wasn’t anything of Lila anymore, everything that had been
hers was gone. As for the son, he seemed more distracted than usual, as if his
mother had definitively gone out of his head.
I returned to the city for two funerals, first my father’s, then Lidia’s, Nino’s
mother. I missed the funeral of Donato, not out of bitterness, only because I
was abroad. When I came to the neighborhood for my father there was a great
uproar because a young man had just been murdered at the entrance to the
library. That made me think that this story would continue forever, recounting
now  the  efforts  of  children  without  privileges  to  improve  themselves  by
getting books from the old shelves, as Lila and I had done as girls, and now the
thread of seductive chatter, promises, deceptions, of blood that prevents any
true improvement in my city or in the world.
The  day  of  Lidia’s  funeral  was  overcast,  the  city  seemed  tranquil,  I  felt
tranquil, too. Then  Nino arrived and  all he  did was talk  loudly, joke,  even
laugh, as if we were not at his mother’s funeral. I found him large, bloated, a
big ruddy man with thinning hair who was constantly celebrating himself.
Getting rid of him, after the funeral, was difficult. I didn’t want to listen to him
or even look at him. He gave me an impression of wasted time, of useless labor,
that I feared would stay in my mind, extending into me, into everything.
On  the  occasion  of  both  funerals  I  made  plans  ahead  of  time  to  visit
Pasquale. In those years I did that whenever I could. In prison he had studied a
lot,  had  received  his  high  school  diploma,  and,  recently,  a  degree  in
astronomical geography.
“If I’d known that to get a diploma and a degree all you needed to have was
free time, to be shut up in a place without worrying about earning a living,
and, with discipline, learning by heart pages and pages of some books, I would
have done it before,” he said once, in a teasing tone.
Today he’s an old man, he speaks serenely, he is much better preserved than
Nino.  With  me  he  rarely  resorts  to  dialect.  But  he  hasn’t  moved  even  a
hairsbreadth out of the space of generous ideas in which his father enclosed
him as a boy. When I saw him after Lidia’s funeral and told him about Lila he
burst out laughing. She must be doing her intelligent and imaginative things
somewhere,  he  muttered.  And  it  moved  him  to  remember  the  time  in  the
neighborhood library when the teacher assigned prizes to the most diligent
readers, and the most diligent was Lila, who took out books illegally with her
relatives’ cards. Ah, Lila the shoemaker, Lila who imitated Kennedy’s wife, Lila
the artist and designer, Lila the worker, Lila the programmer, Lila always in the
same place and always out of place.
“Who took Tina from her?” I asked.
“The Solaras.”
“Sure?”
He smiled, showing his bad teeth. I understood that he wasn’t telling the
truth—maybe  he  didn’t  know  it  and  it  didn’t  even  interest  him—but  was
proclaiming  the  unshakable  faith,  based  on  the  primary  experience  of
injustice, the experience of the neighborhood, that—in spite of the reading he
had done, the degree he had taken, the clandestine journeys, the crimes he had
committed or been accused of—remained the currency of every certainty he
had. He answered:
“Do you also want me to tell you who murdered those two pieces of shit?”
Suddenly  I  read  in  his  gaze  something  that  horrified  me—an
inextinguishable rancor—and I said no. He shook his head, and continued to
smile. He said:
“You’ll see that when Lila decides to, she’ll show up.”
But there was not a trace of her. On those two occasions for mourning I
walked through the neighborhood, I asked around out of curiosity: no one
remembered her, or maybe they were pretending. I couldn’t even talk about
her with Carmen. Roberto died, she left the gas pump, went to live with one of
her sons, in Formia.
What is the point of all these pages, then? I intended to capture her, to have
her beside me again, and I will die without knowing if I succeeded. Sometimes I
wonder where she vanished. At the bottom of the sea. Through a fissure or
down some subterranean tunnel whose existence she alone knows. In an old
bathtub filled with a powerful acid. In an ancient garbage pit, one of those she
devoted  so  many  words  to.  In  the  crypt  of  an  abandoned  church  in  the
mountains. In one of the many dimensions that we don’t know yet but Lila
does, and now she’s there with her daughter.
Will she return?
Will they return together, Lila old, Tina a grown woman?
This morning, sitting on the balcony that looks out over the Po, I’m waiting.
2.
I have breakfast every day at seven, I go to the newsstand with the Labrador
I got recently, I spend a good part of the morning in the Valentino playing with
the dog, leafing through the papers. Yesterday, when I got back, I found on top
of my mailbox a package roughly wrapped in newspaper. I took it, perplexed.
Nothing indicated that it had been left for me or for any other tenant. There
was  no  note  with  it  and  it  didn’t  even  have  my  last  name  written  in  pen
somewhere.
I cautiously opened one edge of the wrapping, and that was enough. Tina
and Nu leaped out of memory even before I got them completely out of the
newspaper. I immediately recognized the dolls that one after the other, almost
six decades earlier, had been thrown—mine by Lila, Lila’s by me—into a cellar
in the neighborhood. They were the dolls we had never found, although we
had descended underground to look for them. They were the ones that Lila had
pushed me to go and retrieve from the house of Don Achille, ogre and thief,
and Don Achille had claimed that he hadn’t taken them, and maybe he had
imagined that it was his son Alfonso who stole them, and so had compensated
us with money to buy new ones. But we hadn’t bought dolls with that money—
how could we have replaced Tina and Nu?—instead we bought Little Women, the
novel that had led Lila to write The Blue Fairy and me to become what I was
today,  the  author  of  many  books  and,  most  important,  of  a  remarkably
successful story entitled A Friendship.
The lobby of the building was silent, no voices or other sounds came from
the  apartments.  I  looked  around  anxiously.  I  wanted  Lila  to  emerge  from
stairway A or B or from the deserted porter’s room, thin, gray, her back bent. I
wished it more than any other thing, I wished it more than an unexpected visit
from my daughters with their children. I expected that she would say in her
usual mocking way: Do you like this gift? But it didn’t happen and I burst into
tears. Here’s what she had done: she had deceived me, she had dragged me
wherever she wanted, from the beginning of our friendship. All our lives she
had told a story of redemption that was hers, using my living body and my
existence.
Or maybe not. Maybe those two dolls that had crossed more than half a
century and had come all the way to Turin meant only that she was well and
loved me, that she had broken her confines and finally intended to travel the
world by now no less small than hers, living in old age, according to a new
truth,  the  life  that  in  youth  had  been  forbidden  to  her  and  that  she  had
forbidden herself.
I went up in the elevator, I shut myself in my apartment. I examined the two
dolls carefully, I smelled the odor of mold, I arranged them against the spines
of my books. Seeing how cheap and ugly they were I felt confused. Unlike
stories, real life, when it has passed, inclines toward obscurity, not clarity. I
thought: now that Lila has let herself be seen so plainly, I must resign myself to
not seeing her anymore.
