M T
IDDLE  IME
1.
I
saw Lila for the last time five years ago, in the winter of 2005. We were walking
along the stradone, early in the morning and, as had been true for years now,
were unable to feel at ease. I was the only one talking, I remember: she was
humming,  she  greeted  people  who  didn’t  respond,  the  rare  times  she
interrupted me she uttered only exclamations, without any evident relation to
what I was saying. Too many bad things, and some terrible, had happened over
the years, and to regain our old intimacy we would have had to speak our
secret thoughts, but I didn’t have the strength to find the words and she, who
perhaps had the strength, didn’t have the desire, didn’t see the use.
Yet I loved her, and when I came to Naples I always tried to see her, even
though, I have to say, I was a little afraid of her. She had changed a great deal.
Age had had the better of us both by then, but while I fought a tendency to
gain weight she was permanently skin and bones. She had short hair that she
cut herself; it was completely white, not by choice but from neglect. Her face
was deeply lined, and increasingly recalled her father’s. She laughed nervously,
almost a shriek, and spoke too loudly. She was constantly gesturing, giving to
each gesture such fierce determination that she seemed to want to slice in half
the houses, the street, the passersby, me.
We had gone as far as the elementary school when a young man I didn’t
know overtook us, out of breath, and shouted to her that the body of a woman
had been found in a flowerbed next to the church. We hurried to the gardens,
and Lila dragged me into the knot of curious bystanders, rudely opening a
path. The woman was lying on one side; she was extraordinarily fat, and was
wearing  an  unfashionable  dark-green  raincoat.  Lila  recognized  her
immediately, but I did not: it was our childhood friend Gigliola Spagnuolo, the
ex-wife of Michele Solara.
I hadn’t seen her for several decades. Her beautiful face was ruined, and her
ankles had become enormous. Her hair, once brown, was now fiery red, and
long, the way she’d had it as a girl, but thin, and spread out on the loose dirt.
One foot was shod in a worn, low-heeled shoe; the other was encased in a gray
wool stocking, with a hole at the big toe, and the shoe was a few feet beyond, as
if she had lost it kicking against some pain or fear. I burst into tears; Lila looked
at me in annoyance.
Sitting on a bench nearby, we waited in silence until Gigliola was taken
away. What had happened to her, how she had died, for the moment no one
knew. We went to Lila’s house, her parents’ old, small apartment, where she
now lived with her son Rino. We talked about our friend; Lila criticized her, the
life she had led, her pretensions, her betrayals. But now it was I who couldn’t
listen. I thought of that face in profile on the dirt, of how thin the long hair
was, of the whitish patches of skull. How many who had been girls with us
were no longer alive, had disappeared from the face of the earth because of
illness,  because  their  nervous  systems  had  been  unable  to  endure  the
sandpaper of torments, because their blood had been spilled. For a while we sat
in the kitchen listlessly, neither of us decisive enough to clear the table. Then
we went out again.
The  sun  of  the  fine  winter  day  gave  things  a  serene  aspect.  The  old
neighborhood,  unlike  us,  had  remained  the  same.  The  low  gray  houses
endured, the courtyard of our games, the dark mouths of the tunnel, and the
violence. But the landscape around it had changed. The greenish stretch of the
ponds was no longer there, the old canning factory had vanished. In their place
was the gleam of glass skyscrapers, once signs of a radiant future that no one
had ever believed in. I had registered the changes, all of them, over the years,
at times with curiosity, more often carelessly. As a child I had imagined that,
beyond the neighborhood, Naples was full of marvels. The skyscraper at the
central station, for example, had made a great impression, decades earlier, as it
rose, story by story, the skeleton of a building that seemed to us extremely tall,
beside  the  ambitious  railroad  station.  How  surprised  I  was  when  I  passed
through  Piazza  Garibaldi:  look  how  high  it  is,  I  said  to  Lila,  to  Carmen,  to
Pasquale, to Ada, to Antonio, to all the companions of those days, as we made
our way to the sea, to the edges of the wealthy neighborhoods. At the top, I
thought, live the angels, and surely they delight in the whole city. To climb up
there, to ascend—how I would have liked that. It was our skyscraper, even if it
was outside the neighborhood, a thing that we saw growing day by day. But the
work had stopped. When I came back from Pisa, the station skyscraper no
longer  seemed  the  symbol  of  a  community  that  was  reviving  but,  rather,
another nest of inefficiency.
During  that  period  I  was  convinced  that  there  was  no  great  difference
between the neighborhood and Naples, the malaise slid from one to the other
without interruption. Whenever I returned I found a city that was spineless,
that couldn’t stand up to changes of season, heat, cold, and, especially, storms.
Look how the station on Piazza Garibaldi was flooded, look how the Galleria
opposite the museum had collapsed; there was a landslide, and the electricity
didn’t come back on. Lodged in my memory were dark streets full of dangers,
unregulated  traffic,  broken  pavements,  giant  puddles.  The  clogged  sewers
splattered, dribbled over. Lavas of water and sewage and garbage and bacteria
spilled  into  the  sea  from  the  hills  that  were  burdened  with  new,  fragile
structures, or eroded the world from below. People died of carelessness, of
corruption, of abuse, and yet, in every round of voting, gave their enthusiastic
approval to the politicians who made their life unbearable. As soon as I got off
the  train,  I  moved  cautiously  in  the  places  where  I  had  grown  up,  always
careful to speak in dialect, as if to indicate I am one of yours, don’t hurt me.
When I graduated from college, when, in a single burst, I wrote a story that
in the space of a few months became, surprisingly, a book, the things of the
world I came from seemed to me to deteriorate even further. In Pisa, in Milan, I
felt good, at times even happy; upon every return to my own city I feared that
some unexpected event would keep me from escaping, that the things I had
gained would be taken away from me. I would be unable to reach Pietro, whom
I was soon to marry; the tidy space of the publishing house would be barred to
me; I would no longer enjoy the refinements of Adele, my future mother-in-
law, a mother as mine had never been. Already in the past the city had seemed
to  me  crowded,  a  crush  from  Piazza  Garibaldi  to  Forcella,  to  Duchesca,  to
Lavinaio, to the Rettifilo. In the late sixties the crush seemed to intensify, while
impatience, aggressiveness spread without restraint. One morning I ventured
out to Via Mezzocannone, where some years earlier I had worked as a clerk in a
bookstore. I went because I was curious to see the place where I had toiled, and
also to see the university, where I had never been. I wanted to compare it with
the university in Pisa, the Normale, I was even hoping I might run into the
children  of  Professor  Galiani—Armando,  Nadia—and  boast  of  what  I  had
accomplished. But the street, the university buildings had distressed me. They
were  teeming  with  students  from  Naples  and  the  province  and  the  whole
South,  well-dressed,  noisy,  self-confident  youths,  and  others,  rough  yet
inferior. They thronged the entrances, the classrooms, stood in long, often
quarrelsome lines in front of the secretaries. Without warning, three or four
started hitting each other a few steps from me, as if the mere sight of one
another were sufficient for an explosion of insults and blows, a fury of boys
shouting  their  craving  for  blood  in  a  dialect  that  I  myself  had  difficulty
understanding. I left in a hurry, as if something threatening had touched me in
a place that I had imagined safe, inhabited only by good reasons.
Every year, in other words, it seemed to me worse. In that season of rains,
the city had cracked yet again, an entire building had buckled onto one side,
like a person who, sitting in an old chair, leans on the worm-eaten arm and it
gives way. Dead, wounded. And shouts, blows, cherry bombs. The city seemed
to harbor in its guts a fury that couldn’t get out and therefore eroded it from
the inside, or erupted in pustules on the surface, swollen with venom against
everyone, children, adults, old people, visitors from other cities, Americans
from  NATO,  tourists  of  every  nationality,  the  Neapolitans  themselves.  How
could one endure in that place of disorder and danger, on the outskirts, in the
center, on the hills, at the foot of Vesuvius? What a brutal impression San
Giovanni a Teduccio had left on me, and the journey to get there. How brutal
the factory where Lila was working, and Lila herself—Lila with her small child,
Lila who lived in a run-down building with Enzo, although they didn’t sleep
together. She had said that he wanted to study computers, and that she was
trying to help him. I still remember her voice, as it tried to erase San Giovanni,
the salami, the odor of the factory, her situation, by citing with false expertise
abbreviations like: Cybernetics Center of the State University of Milan, Soviet
Center for the Application of Computer Science to the Social Sciences. She
wanted  to  make  me  believe  that  a  center  of  that  type  would  soon  be
established even in Naples. I had thought: in Milan maybe, certainly in the
Soviet Union, but here no, here it is the folly of your uncontrollable mind, into
which you are dragging even poor, devoted Enzo. Leave, instead. Get away for
good, far from the life we’ve lived since birth. Settle in well-organized lands
where everything really is possible. I had fled, in fact. Only to discover, in the
decades to come, that I had been wrong, that it was a chain with larger and
larger links: the neighborhood was connected to the city, the city to Italy, Italy
to Europe, Europe to the whole planet. And this is how I see it today: it’s not
the  neighborhood  that’s  sick,  it’s  not  Naples,  it’s  the  entire  earth,  it’s  the
universe, or universes. And shrewdness means hiding and hiding from oneself
the true state of things.
I talked about it with Lila that afternoon, in the winter of 2005, emphatically
and  as  if  to  make  amends.  I  wanted  to  acknowledge  openly  that  she  had
understood everything since she was a girl, without ever leaving Naples. But I
was almost immediately ashamed, I heard in my words the irritable pessimism
of someone who is getting old, a tone I knew she detested.
In fact, in a nervous grimace of a smile that showed her old teeth, she said:
“Are you playing the know-it-all, the moralizer? What do you intend to do?
You want to write about us? You want to write about me?”
“No.”
“Tell the truth.”
“It would be too complicated.”
“You’ve thought about it, though, you’re thinking about it.”
“A little, yes.”
“Let me be, Lenù. Let us all be. We ought to disappear, we deserve nothing,
neither Gigliola nor me, no one.”
“That’s not true.”
She had an ugly expression of discontent, and she scrutinized me, her pupils
hardly visible, her lips half parted.
“All right,” she said, “write, if you want, write about Gigliola, about whoever
you want. But about me no, don’t you dare, promise.”
“I won’t write about anyone, not even you.”
“Careful, I’ve got my eye on you.”
“Yes?”
“I’ll come look in your computer, I’ll read your files, I’ll erase them.”
“Come on.”
“You think I’m not capable of it?”
“I know you’re capable. But I can protect myself.”
She laughed in her old mean way.
“Not from me.”
2.
I have never forgotten those three words; it was the last thing she said to
me: Not from me. For weeks now I’ve been writing at a good pace, without
wasting time rereading. If Lila is still alive—I imagine as I sip my coffee and
look out at the Po, bumping against the piers of the Principessa Isabella bridge
—she won’t be able to resist, she’ll come and poke around in my computer,
she’ll read, and, cantankerous old woman that she is, she’ll get angry at my
disobedience, she’ll want to interfere, correct, add, she’ll forget her craving to
disappear. Then I wash the cup, go back to the desk to write, starting from that
cold spring evening in Milan, more than forty years ago, in the bookstore,
when the man with the thick eyeglasses spoke derisively about me and my
book in front of everyone, and I replied in confusion, shaking. Until suddenly
Nino  Sarratore  stood  up  and,  almost  unrecognizable  with  his  unruly  black
beard, harshly attacked the man who had attacked me. Right then my whole
self began to silently shout his name—how long had it been since I’d seen him:
four,  five  years—and  although  I  was  ice-cold  with  tension  I  felt  myself
blushing.
As soon as Nino stopped talking, the man, with a slight gesture, asked to
respond. It was clear that he was offended, but I was too agitated by violent
emotions to immediately understand why. I was aware, naturally, that Nino’s
words  had  shifted  the  conversation  from  literature  to  politics,  and  in  an
aggressive,  almost  disrespectful  way.  Yet  at  the  moment  I  gave  that  little
importance;  I  couldn’t  forgive  myself  for  my  failure  to  stand  up  to  the
challenge, for having been ineffectual in front of a sophisticated audience. And
yet I was clever. In high school I had reacted to my disadvantages by trying to
become like Professor Galiani, I had adopted her tones and her language. In
Pisa that model of a woman hadn’t been enough; I had had to deal with highly
experienced people. Franco, Pietro, all the best students, and of course the
renowned teachers at the Normale expressed themselves in a complex manner:
they wrote with deliberate artifice, they had an ability to classify, a logical
lucidity, that Professor Galiani didn’t possess. But I had trained myself to be
like them. And often I succeeded: it seemed to me that I had mastered words to
the point of sweeping away forever the contradictions of being in the world,
the surge of emotions, and breathless speech. In short, I now knew a method of
speaking  and  writing  that—by  means  of  a  refined  vocabulary,  stately  and
thoughtful  pacing,  a  determined  arrangement  of  arguments,  and  a  formal
orderliness that wasn’t supposed to fail—sought to annihilate the interlocutor
to the point where he lost the will to object. But that evening things didn’t go
as they should have. First, Adele and her friends, whom I imagined as very
sophisticated readers, and then the man with the thick eyeglasses intimidated
me. I had become again the eager little girl from the poor neighborhood of
Naples,  the  daughter  of  the  porter  with  the  dialect  cadence  of  the  South,
amazed at having ended up in that place, playing the part of the cultured
young  writer.  So  I  had  lost  confidence  and  expressed  myself  in  an
unconvincing, disjointed manner. Not to mention Nino. His appearance had
taken away any self-control, and the very quality of his speech on my behalf
had  confirmed  to  me  that  I  had  abruptly  lost  my  abilities.  We  came  from
backgrounds that were not very different, we had both worked hard to acquire
that language. And yet not only had he used it naturally, turning it easily
against the speaker, but, at times, when it seemed to him necessary, he had
even  dared  to  insert  disorder  into  that  polished  Italian  with  a  bold
nonchalance that rapidly managed to make the professorial tones of the other
man sound out of date and perhaps a little ridiculous. As a result, when I saw
that the man wished to speak again, I thought: he’s really angry, and if he said
bad  things  about  my  book  before,  now  he’ll  say  something  even  worse  to
humiliate Nino, who defended it.
But the man seemed to be gripped by something else: he did not return to
my  book;  he  didn’t  bring  me  into  it  at  all.  He  focused  instead  on  certain
formulas  that  Nino  had  used  incidentally  but  had  repeated  several  times:
things like baronial arrogance, anti-authoritarian literature. I understood only then
that what had made him angry was the political turn of the discussion. He
hadn’t liked that vocabulary, and he emphasized this by inserting a sudden
sarcastic  falsetto  into  his  deep  voice  (And  so  pride  in  knowledge  is  today
characterized as pretension, and so literature, too, has become anti-authoritarian?).
Then he began to play subtly with the word authority, thank God, he said, a
barrier against the uncultured youths who make random pronouncements on
everything  by  resorting  to  the  nonsense  of  who  knows  what  student-run
course  at  the  state  university.  And  he  spoke  at  length  on  that  subject,
addressing  the  audience,  never  Nino  or  me  directly.  In  his  conclusion,
however, he focused first on the old critic who was sitting next to me and then
directly  on  Adele,  who  was  perhaps  his  true  polemical  objective  from  the
beginning. I have no argument with the young people, he said, briefly, but with
those educated adults who, out of self-interest, are always ready to ride the
latest fashion in stupidity. Here at last he was silent, and he prepared to leave
with quiet but energetic “Excuse me”s, “May I”s, “thank you”s.
The audience rose to let him pass, hostile and yet deferential. It was utterly
clear to me by now that he was an important man, so important that even
Adele answered his dark nod of greeting with a cordial Thank you, goodbye.
Maybe for that reason Nino surprised everyone a little when, in an imperative
and at the same time joking tone, evidence that he was aware who he was
dealing with, he called him by the title of professor—Professor, where are you
going, don’t run off—and then, thanks to the agility of his long legs, cut off his
path, confronted him, spoke to him in that new language of his that I couldn’t
really hear from where I was, couldn’t really understand, but that must be like
steel cables in a hot sun. The man listened without moving, showing no signs
of impatience, and then he made a gesture with his hand that meant move
aside, and headed toward the door.
3.
I left the table in a daze, struggling to take in the fact that Nino was really
there, in Milan, in that room. And yet he was, already he was coming toward
me, smiling, but at a restrained, unhurried pace. We shook hands, his was hot,
mine cold, and we said how glad we were to see each other after so long. To
know that finally the worst of the evening was over and that now he was
before me, real, assuaged my bad mood but not my agitation. I introduced him
to the critic who had generously praised my book, saying that he was a friend
from  Naples,  that  we  had  gone  to  high  school  together.  The  professor,
although he, too, had received some jabs from Nino, was polite, praised the
way he had treated that man, and spoke of Naples with fondness, addressing
him as if he were a gifted student who was to be encouraged. Nino explained
that he had lived in Milan for some years, his field was economic geography, he
belonged—and  he  smiled—to  the  most  wretched  category  in  the  academic
pyramid, that is to say lecturer. He said it sweetly, without the almost sullen
tones he had had as a boy, and it seemed to me that he wore a lighter armor
than that which had fascinated me in high school, as if he had shed any excess
weight in order to be able to joust more rapidly and with elegance. I noted with
relief that he wasn’t wearing a wedding ring.
Meanwhile  some  of  Adele’s  friends  had  come  over  to  have  their  books
signed,  which  made  me  nervous:  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  done  this.  I
hesitated: I didn’t want to lose sight of Nino even for an instant, but I also
wanted to mitigate the impression I must have made of a clumsy girl. So I left
him with the old professor—his name was Tarratano—and greeted my readers
politely. I intended to do this quickly, but the books were new, with an odor of
ink, so different from the dog-eared, ill-smelling books that Lila and I took out
from  the  library  in  the  neighborhood,  and  I  didn’t  feel  like  marring  them
carelessly with the pen. I displayed my best handwriting, from the time of
Maestra  Oliviero,  I  invented  elaborate  dedications  that  caused  some
impatience  in  the  women  who  were  waiting.  My  heart  was  pounding  as  I
wrote, with an eye on Nino. I trembled at the idea that he would leave.
He didn’t. Now Adele had gone up to him and Tarratano, and Nino spoke to
her confidently and yet with deference. I remembered when he used to talk to
Professor Galiani in the corridors of the high school, and it took me a while to
consolidate  in  my  mind  the  brilliant  high  school  student  of  then  with  the
young man of now. I vehemently discarded, on the other hand, as a pointless
deviation that had made all of us suffer, the university student of Ischia, the
lover of my married friend, the helpless youth who hid in the bathroom of the
shop on Piazza dei Martiri and who was the father of Gennaro, a child he had
never seen. Certainly Lila’s irruption had thrown him off, but—it now seemed
obvious—it was just a digression. However intense that experience must have
been, however deep the marks it had left, it was over now. Nino had found
himself again, and I was pleased. I thought: I have to tell Lila that I saw him,
that he’s well. Then I changed my mind: no, I won’t tell her.
When I finished the dedications, the room was empty. Adele took me gently
by the hand, she praised the way I had spoken of my book and the way I had
responded to the terrible intrusion—so she called it—of the man with the thick
eyeglasses. Since I denied having done well (I knew perfectly well that it wasn’t
true),  she  asked  Nino  and  Tarratano  to  give  their  opinion,  and  both  were
profuse with compliments. Nino went so far as to say, looking at me seriously:
You don’t know what that girl was like in high school, extremely intelligent, cultivated,
very courageous, very beautiful. And while I felt my face burning, he began to tell
with  exaggerated  courtesy  the  story  of  my  clash  with  the  religion  teacher
years earlier. Adele laughed frequently as she listened. In our family, she said,
we understood Elena’s virtues right away, and then she said she had made a
reservation  for  dinner  at  a  place  nearby.  I  was  alarmed,  I  said  in
embarrassment that I was tired and not hungry, I would happily take a short
walk with Nino before going to bed. I knew it was rude, the dinner was meant
to celebrate me and thank Tarratano for his work on behalf of my book, but I
couldn’t  stop  myself.  Adele  looked  at  me  for  a  moment  with  a  sardonic
expression,  she  replied  that  naturally  my  friend  was  invited,  and  added
mysteriously, as if to compensate for the sacrifice I was making: I have a nice
surprise  in  store  for  you.  I  looked  at  Nino  anxiously:  would  he  accept  the
invitation? He said he didn’t want to be a bother, he looked at his watch, he
accepted.
4.
We left the bookstore. Adele, tactfully, went ahead with Tarratano, Nino and
I followed. But I immediately found that I didn’t know what to say to him, I was
afraid that every word would be wrong. He made sure there were no silences.
He  praised  my  book  again,  he  went  on  to  speak  with  great  respect  of  the
Airotas  (he  called  them  “the  most  civilized  of  the  families  who  count  for
something in Italy”), he said he knew Mariarosa (“She’s always on the front
lines: two weeks ago we had a big argument”), he congratulated me because he
had learned from Adele that I was engaged to Pietro, whose book on Bacchic
rites he seemed to know, amazing me; but he spoke with respect especially of
the father, Professor Guido Airota, “a truly exceptional man.” I was a little
annoyed that he already knew of my engagement, and it made me uneasy that
the praise of my book had served as an introduction to the far more insistent
praise of Pietro’s entire family, Pietro’s book. I interrupted him, I asked him
about himself, but he was vague, with only a few allusions to a small volume
coming out that he called boring but obligatory. I pressed him, I asked if he had
had a hard time during his early days in Milan. He answered with a few generic
remarks about the problems of coming from the South without a cent in your
pocket. Then out of the blue he asked me: “Are you living in Naples again?”
“For now, yes.”
“In the neighborhood?”
“Yes.”
“I’ve  broken  conclusively  with  my  father,  and  I  don’t  see  anyone  in  my
family.”
“Too bad.”
“It’s better that way. I’m just sorry not to have any news of Lina.”
For a moment I thought I’d been wrong, that Lila had never gone out of his
life, that he had come to the bookstore not for me but only to find out about
her. Then I said to myself: if he had really wanted to find out about Lila, in so
many years he would have found a way, and I reacted violently, in the sharp
tone of someone who wants to end the subject quickly: “She left her husband
and lives with someone else.”
“Did she have a boy or a girl?”
“A boy.”
He made a grimace of displeasure and said: “Lina is brave, even too brave.
But she doesn’t know how to submit to reality, she’s incapable of accepting
others and herself. Loving her was a difficult experience.”
“In what sense?”
“She doesn’t know what dedication is.”
“Maybe you’re exaggerating.”
“No, she’s really made badly: in her mind and in everything, even when it
comes to sex.”
Those last words—even when it comes to sex—struck me more than the others.
So Nino’s judgment on his relationship with Lila was negative? So he had just
said to me, disturbingly, that that opinion included even the sexual arena? I
stared for some seconds at the dark outlines of Adele and her friend walking
ahead of us. The disturbance became anxiety, I sensed that even when it comes to
sex was a preamble, that he wished to become still more explicit. Years earlier,
Stefano,  after  his  marriage,  had  confided  in  me,  had  told  me  about  his
problems with Lila, but he had done so without ever mentioning sex—no one in
the  neighborhood  would  have  in  speaking  of  the  woman  he  loved.  It  was
unthinkable,  for  example,  that  Pasquale  would  talk  to  me  about  Ada’s
sexuality, or, worse, that Antonio would speak to Carmen or Gigliola about my
sexuality. Boys might talk among themselves—and in a vulgar way, when they
didn’t  like  us  girls  or  no  longer  liked  us—but  among  boys  and  girls  no.  I
guessed instead that Nino, the new Nino, considered it completely normal to
discuss with me his sexual relations with my friend. I was embarrassed, I pulled
back. Of this, too, I thought, I must never speak to Lila, and meanwhile I said
with feigned indifference: water under the bridge, let’s not be sad, let’s go back
to you, what are you working on, what are your prospects at the university,
where do you live, by yourself? But I certainly overdid it; he must have felt that
I had made a quick escape. He smiled ironically, and was about to answer. But
we had arrived at the restaurant, and we went in.
5.
Adele assigned us places: I was next to Nino and opposite Tarratano, she
next  to  Tarratano  and  opposite  Nino.  We  ordered,  and  meanwhile  the
conversation  had  shifted  to  the  man  with  the  thick  glasses,  a  professor  of
Italian literature—I learned—a Christian Democrat, and a regular contributor
to the Corriere della Sera. Adele and her friend now lost all restraint. Outside of
the bookstore ritual, they couldn’t say enough bad things about the man, and
they congratulated Nino for the way he had confronted and routed him. They
especially enjoyed recalling what Nino had said as the man was leaving the
room, remarks they had heard and I hadn’t. They asked him what his exact
words were, and Nino retreated, saying that he didn’t remember. But then the
words emerged, maybe reinvented for the occasion, something like: In order to
safeguard authority in all of its manifestations, you suspend democracy. And from
there the three of them took off, talking, with increasing ardor, about the
secret  services,  about  Greece,  about  torture  in  the  Greek  prisons,  about
Vietnam, about the unexpected uprising of the student movement not only in
Italy but in Europe and the world, about an article in Il Ponte by Professor
Airota—which  Nino  said  that  he  agreed  with,  word  for  word—about  the
conditions of research and teaching in the universities.
“I’ll tell my daughter that you liked it,” Adele said. “Mariarosa thought it was
terrible.”
“Mariarosa gets passionate only about what the world can’t give.”
“Very good, that really is what she’s like.”
I knew nothing of that article by my future father-in-law. The subject made
me uneasy, and I listened in silence. First my exams, then my thesis, then the
book and its rapid publication had absorbed much of my time. I was informed
about  world  events  only  superficially,  and  I  had  picked  up  almost  nothing
about students, demonstrations, clashes, the wounded, arrests, blood. Since I
was now outside the university, all I really knew about that chaos was Pietro’s
grumblings, his complaints about what he called literally “the Pisan nonsense.”
As a result I felt around me a scene with confusing features: features that,
however, my companions seemed able to decipher with great precision, Nino
even more than the others. I sat beside him, I listened, I touched his arm with
mine, a contact merely of fabrics which nevertheless agitated me. He had kept
his fondness for figures: he was giving a list of numbers, of students enrolled in
the university, a crowd by now, and of the capacity of the buildings; of the
hours the tenured professors actually worked, and how many of them, rather
than  doing  research  and  teaching,  sat  in  parliament  or  on  administrative
committees  or  devoted  themselves  to  lucrative  consulting  jobs  and  private
practice. Adele agreed, and so did her friend; occasionally they interrupted,
mentioning people I had never heard of. I felt excluded. The celebration for my
book was no longer at the top of their thoughts, my mother-in-law seemed to
have forgotten even the surprise she had announced for me. I said that I had to
get  up  for  a  moment;  Adele  nodded  absently,  Nino  continued  to  speak
passionately. Tarratano must have thought that I was getting bored and said
kindly, almost in a whisper: “Hurry back, I’d like to hear your opinion.”
“I don’t have opinions,” I said with a half smile.
He smiled in turn: “A writer always invents one.”
“Maybe I’m not a writer.”
“Yes, you are.”
I went to the bathroom. Nino had always had the capacity, as soon as he
opened his mouth, to demonstrate to me my backwardness. I have to start
studying, I thought, how could I let myself go like this? Of course, if I want I
can fake some expertise and some enthusiasm. But I can’t go on like that, I’ve
learned too many things that don’t count and very few that do. At the end of
my affair with Franco, I had lost the little curiosity about the world that he had
instilled  in  me.  And  my  engagement  to  Pietro  hadn’t  helped,  what  didn’t
interest him lost interest for me. How different Pietro is from his father, his
sister, his mother. And how different he is from Nino. If it had been up to him, I
wouldn’t  ever  have  written  my  novel.  He  was  almost  irritated  by  it,  as  an
infraction  of  the  academic  rules.  Or  maybe  I’m  exaggerating,  it’s  just  my
problem.  I’m  so  limited,  I  can  only  concentrate  on  one  thing  at  a  time,
excluding everything else. But now I’ll change. Right after this boring dinner
I’ll drag Nino with me, I’ll make him walk all night, I’ll ask him what books I
should read, what films I should see, what music I should listen to. And I’ll take
him by the arm, I’ll say: I’m cold. Confused intentions, incomplete proposals. I
hid from myself the anxiety I felt, I said to myself only: It might be the only
chance we have, tomorrow I’m leaving, I won’t see him again.
Meanwhile  I  gazed  angrily  into  the  mirror.  My  face  looked  tired,  small
pimples on my chin and dark circles under my eyes announced my period. I’m
ugly, short, my bust is too big. I should have understood long ago that he never
liked me, it was no coincidence that he preferred Lila. But with what result?
She’s made badly even when it comes to sex, he said. I was wrong to avoid the
subject. I should have acted curious, let him continue. If he talks about it again
I’ll be more open-minded, I’ll say: what does it mean that a girl is made badly
when it comes to sex? I’m asking you, I’ll explain laughing, so that I can correct
myself, if it seems necessary. Assuming that one can correct it, who knows. I
remembered with disgust what had happened with his father on the beach at
the Maronti. I thought of making love with Franco on the little bed in his room
in Pisa—had I done something wrong that he had noticed but had tactfully not
mentioned to me? And if that very evening, let’s say, I had gone to bed with
Nino, would I make more mistakes, so that he would think: she’s made badly,
like Lila, and would he speak of it behind my back to his girlfriends at the
university, maybe even to Mariarosa?
I realized the offensiveness of those words; I should have rebuked him. From
that mistaken sex, I should have said to him, from an experience of which you
now  express  a  negative  opinion,  came  a  child,  little  Gennaro,  who  is  very
intelligent: it’s not nice for you to talk like that, you can’t reduce the question
to who is made badly and who is made well. Lila ruined herself for you. And I
made up my mind: when I get rid of Adele and her friend, when he walks me to
the hotel, I’ll return to the subject and tell him.
I came out of the bathroom. I went back to the dining room and discovered
that during my absence the situation had changed. As soon as my mother-in-
law saw me, she waved and said happily, her cheeks alight: the surprise finally
got here. The surprise was Pietro, he was sitting next to her.
6.
My fiancé jumped up, he embraced me. I had never told him anything about
Nino. I had said a few words about Antonio, and had told him something about
my relationship with Franco, which, besides, was well known in the student
world of Pisa. Nino, however, I had never mentioned. It was a story that hurt
me, it had painful moments that I was ashamed of. To tell it meant to confess
that I had loved forever a person as I would never love him. And to give it an
order, a sense, involved talking about Lila, about Ischia, maybe even going so
far as to admit that the episode of sex with an older man, as it appeared in my
book, was inspired by a true experience at the Maronti, by a decision that I had
made  as  a  desperate  girl  and  which  now,  after  so  much  time  had  passed,
seemed to me repugnant. My own business, therefore. I had held on to my
secrets.  If  Pietro  had  known,  he  would  have  easily  understood  why  I  was
greeting him without pleasure.
He sat down again at the head of the table, between his mother and Nino. He
ate a steak, drank some wine, but he looked at me in alarm, aware of my
unhappiness. Certainly he felt at fault because he hadn’t arrived in time and
had  missed  an  important  event  in  my  life,  because  his  neglect  could  be
interpreted as a sign that he didn’t love me, because he had left me among
strangers without the comfort of his affection. It would have been difficult to
tell him that my dark face, my muteness, could be explained precisely by the
fact that he hadn’t remained completely absent, that he had intruded between
me and Nino.
Nino, meanwhile, was making me even more unhappy. He was sitting next
to me but didn’t address a word to me. He seemed happy about Pietro’s arrival.
He poured wine for him, offered him cigarettes, lighted one, and now they
were both smoking, lips compressed, and talking about the difficult journey by
car from Pisa to Milan, and the pleasure of driving. It struck me how different
they were: Nino thin, lanky, his voice high and cordial; Pietro thick-set, with
the comical tangle of hair over his large forehead, his broad cheeks scraped by
the razor, his voice always low. They seemed pleased to have met, which was
unusual for Pietro, who was generally reserved. Nino pressed him, showing a
real interest in his studies (I read an article somewhere in which you compare milk
and honey to wine and every form of drunkenness), and urging him to talk about
them, so that my fiancé, who tended not to talk about his subject, gave in, he
corrected good-humoredly, he opened up. But just when Pietro was starting to
gain confidence, Adele interrupted.
“Enough talk,” she said to her son. “What about the surprise for Elena?”
I looked at her uncertainly. There were other surprises? Wasn’t it enough
that Pietro had driven for hours without stopping, to arrive only in time for
the dinner in my honor? I thought of my fiancé with curiosity, he had a sulky
expression that I knew and that he assumed when circumstances forced him to
speak about himself in public. He announced to me, but almost in a whisper,
that he had become a tenured professor, a very young tenured professor, with
a position at Florence. Like that, by magic, in his typical fashion. He never
boasted of his brilliance, he was scarcely aware of his value as a scholar, he
kept silent about the struggles he had endured. And now, look, he mentioned
that news casually, as if he had been forced to by his mother, as if for him it
meant nothing. In fact, it meant remarkable prestige at a young age, it meant
economic  security,  it  meant  leaving  Pisa,  it  meant  escaping  a  political  and
cultural climate that for months, I don’t know why, had exasperated him. It
meant finally that in the fall, or at the beginning of the next year, we would get
married and I would leave Naples. No one mentioned this last thing, instead
they all congratulated Pietro and me. Even Nino, who right afterward looked at
his watch, made some acerbic remarks on university careers, and exclaimed
that he was sorry but he had to go.
We all got up. I didn’t know what to do, I uselessly sought his gaze, as a great
sorrow  filled  my  heart.  End  of  the  evening,  missed  opportunity,  aborted
desires. Out on the street I hoped that he would give me a phone number, an
address. He merely shook my hand and wished me all the best. From that
moment it seemed to me that each of his gestures was deliberately cutting me
off. As a kind of farewell I gave him a half smile, waving my hand as if I were
holding a pen. It was a plea, it meant: you know where I live, write to me,
please. But he had already turned his back.
7.
I thanked Adele and her friend for all the trouble they had taken for me and
for my book. They both praised Nino at length, sincerely, speaking to me as if it
were I who had contributed to making him so likable, so intelligent. Pietro said
nothing, he merely nodded a bit nervously when his mother told him to return
soon, they were both guests of Mariarosa. I said immediately: you don’t have to
come  with  me,  go  with  your  mother.  It  didn’t  occur  to  anyone  that  I  was
serious, that I was unhappy and would rather be alone.
All the way back I was impossible. I exclaimed that I didn’t like Florence, and
it wasn’t true. I exclaimed that I didn’t want to write anymore, I wanted to
teach, and it wasn’t true. I exclaimed that I was tired, I was very sleepy, and it
wasn’t true. Not only that. When, suddenly, Pietro declared that he wanted to
meet my parents, I yelled at him: you’re crazy, forget my parents, you’re not
suitable for them and they aren’t suitable for you. Then he was frightened, and
asked: “Do you not want to marry me anymore?”
I was about to say: No, I don’t want to, but I restrained myself in time, I knew
that that wasn’t true, either. I said weakly, I’m sorry, I’m depressed, of course I
want to marry you, and I took his hand, I interlaced my fingers in his. He was
an intelligent man, extraordinarily cultured, and good. I loved him, I didn’t
mean to make him suffer. And yet, even as I was holding his hand, even as I
was affirming that I wanted to marry him, I knew clearly that if he hadn’t
appeared that night at the restaurant I would have tried to sleep with Nino.
I had a hard time admitting it to myself. Certainly it would have been an
offense that Pietro didn’t deserve, and yet I would have committed it willingly
and perhaps without remorse. I would have found a way to draw Nino to me,
with all the years that had passed, from elementary school to high school, up
to the time of Ischia and Piazza dei Martiri. I would have made love with him,
even though I hadn’t liked that remark about Lila, and was distressed by it. I
would have slept with him and to Pietro I would have said nothing. Maybe I
could have told Lila, but who knows when, maybe as an old woman, when I
imagined that nothing would matter anymore to her or to me. Time, as in all
things, was decisive. Nino would last a single night, he would leave me in the
morning. Even though I had known him forever, he was made of dreams, and
holding  on  to  him  forever  would  have  been  impossible:  he  came  from
childhood, he was constructed out of childish desires, he had no concreteness,
he  didn’t  face  the  future.  Pietro,  on  the  other  hand,  was  of  the  present,
massive,  a  boundary  stone.  He  marked  a  land  new  to  me,  a  land  of  good
reasons,  governed  by  rules  that  originated  in  his  family  and  endowed
everything with meaning. Grand ideals flourished, the cult of the reputation,
matters of principle. Nothing in the sphere of the Airotas was perfunctory.
Marriage, for example, was a contribution to a secular battle. Pietro’s parents
had had only a civil wedding, and Pietro, although as far as I knew he had a
vast  religious  knowledge,  would  never  get  married  in  a  church;  rather,  he
would give me up. The same went for baptism. Pietro hadn’t been baptized, nor
had Mariarosa, so any children that might come wouldn’t be baptized, either.
Everything about him had that tendency, seemed always to be guided by a
superior  order  that,  although  its  origin  was  not  divine  but  came  from  his
family, gave him, just the same, the certainty of being on the side of truth and
justice. As for sex, I don’t know, he was wary. He knew enough of my affair
with  Franco  Mari  to  deduce  that  I  wasn’t  a  virgin,  and  yet  he  had  never
mentioned the subject, not even an accusatory phrase, a vulgar comment, a
laugh. I didn’t think he’d had other girlfriends; it was hard to imagine him with
a prostitute, I was sure he hadn’t spent even a minute of his life talking about
women with other men. He hated salacious remarks. He hated gossip, raised
voices,  parties,  every  form  of  waste.  Although  his  circumstances  were
comfortable, he tended—in this unlike his parents and his sister—to a sort of
asceticism amid the abundance. And he had a conspicuous sense of duty, he
would never fail in his commitments to me, he would never betray me.
No, I did not want to lose him. Never mind if my nature, coarse in spite of
the education I had had, was far from his rigor, if I honestly didn’t know how I
would stand up to all  that geometry. He gave me  the certainty that I  was
escaping the opportunistic malleability of my father and the crudeness of my
mother. So I forced myself to repress the thought of Nino, I took Pietro by the
arm, I murmured, yes, let’s get married as soon as possible, I want to leave
home,  I  want  to  get  a  driver’s  license,  I  want  to  travel,  I  want  to  have  a
telephone, a television, I’ve never had anything. And he at that point became
cheerful, he laughed, he said yes to everything I randomly asked for. A few
steps from the hotel he stopped, he whispered hoarsely: Can I sleep with you?
That was the last surprise of the evening. I looked at him bewildered: I had
been ready so many times to make love, he had always avoided it; but having
him in the bed there, in Milan, in the hotel, after the traumatic discussion in
the bookstore, after Nino, I didn’t feel like it. I answered: We’ve waited so long,
we can wait a little longer. I kissed him in a dark corner, I watched him from
the hotel entrance as he walked away along Corso Garibaldi, and every so often
turned and waved timidly. His clumsy gait, his flat feet, the tangle of his hair
moved me.
8.
From that moment life began to pound me without respite, the months were
rapidly grafted onto one another, there was no day when something good or
bad  didn’t  happen.  I  returned  to  Naples,  thinking  about  Nino,  and  that
encounter without consequences, and at times the wish to see Lila was strong,
to go and wait for her to come home from work, tell her what could be told
without hurting her. Then I convinced myself that merely mentioning Nino
would wound her, and I gave it up. Lila had gone her way, he his. I had urgent
things to deal with. For example, the evening of my return from Milan I told
my parents that Pietro was coming to meet them, that probably we would be
married within the year, that I was going to live in Florence.
They showed no joy, or even satisfaction. I thought that they had finally
grown used to my coming and going as I liked, increasingly estranged from the
family, indifferent to their problems of survival. And it seemed to me normal
that only my father became somewhat agitated, always nervous at the prospect
of situations he didn’t feel prepared for.
“Does the university professor have to come to our house?” he asked, in
irritation.
“Where else?” my mother said angrily. “How can he ask you for Lenuccia’s
hand if he doesn’t come here?”
Usually she seemed more prepared than he, concrete, resolute to the point
of indifference. But once she had silenced him, once her husband had gone to
bed and Elisa and Peppe and Gianni had set up their beds in the dining room, I
had to change my mind. She attacked me in very low but shrill tones, hissing
with reddened eyes: We are nothing to you, you tell us nothing until the last
minute, the young lady thinks she’s somebody because she has an education,
because she writes books, because she’s marrying a professor, but my dear, you
came out of this belly and you are made of this substance, so don’t act superior
and don’t ever forget that if you are intelligent, I who carried you in here am
just as intelligent, if not more, and if I had had the chance I would have done
the  same  as  you,  understand?  Then,  on  the  crest  of  her  rage,  she  first
reproached me saying that because I had left, and thought only of myself, my
siblings hadn’t done well in school, and then asked me for money, or, rather,
demanded it: she needed it to buy a decent dress for Elisa and to fix up the
house a bit, since I was forcing her to receive my fiancé.
I passed over my siblings’ lack of success in school. The money, on the other
hand, I gave her right away, even if it wasn’t true that she needed it for the
house—she continually asked for money, any excuse would do. Although she
had never said so explicitly, she still couldn’t accept the fact that I kept my
money in a post-office savings account, that I hadn’t handed it over to her as I
always had, ever since I first took the stationer’s daughters to the beach, or
worked in the bookstore on Via Mezzocannone. Maybe, I thought, by acting as
if my money belonged to her she wants to convince me that I myself belong to
her, and that, even if I get married, I will belong to her forever.
I remained calm, I told her as a sort of compensation that I would have a
telephone put in, that I would buy a television on the installment plan. She
looked at me uncertainly, with a sudden admiration that clashed with what she
had just been saying.
“A television and telephone in this house here?”
“Yes.”
“You’ll pay for it?”
“Yes.”
“Always, even after you’re married?”
“Yes.”
“The professor knows that there’s not a cent for a dowry, and not even for a
reception?”
“He knows, and we’re not having a reception.”
Again her mood changed, her eyes became inflamed.
“What do you mean, no reception? Make him pay.”
“No, we’re doing without.”
My mother became furious again, she provoked me in every way she could
think of, she wanted me to respond so that she could get angrier.
“You remember Lila’s wedding, you remember the reception she had?”
“Yes.”
“And you, who are much better than she is, don’t want to do anything?”
“No.”
We went on like that until I decided that, rather than taking her rage in
doses, it would be better to have it all at once, one grand fury: “Ma,” I said, “not
only are we not having a party but I’m not even getting married in church, I’m
getting married at city hall.”
At that point it was as if doors and windows had been blown open by a
strong  wind.  Although  she  wasn’t  religious,  my  mother  lost  control  and,
leaning toward me, red in the face, began yelling insults at me. She shouted
that the marriage was worthless if the priest didn’t say that it was valid. She
shouted that if I didn’t get married before God I would never be a wife but only
a whore, and, despite her lame leg, she almost flew as she went to wake my
father, my siblings, to let them know what she had always feared, that too
much education had ruined my brain, that I had had all the luck and yet I was
treated like a whore, that she would never be able to go out of the house
because of the shame of having a godless daughter.
My father, stunned, in his underwear, and my siblings sought to understand
what other trouble they had to deal with because of me, and tried to calm her,
but  in  vain.  She  shouted  that  she  wanted  to  throw  me  out  of  the  house
immediately,  before  I  exposed  her,  too,  her,  too,  to  the  shame  of  having  a
concubine daughter like Lila and Ada. Meanwhile, although she wasn’t actually
hitting me, she struck the air as if I were a shadow and she had grabbed a real
me, whom she was beating ferociously. It was some time before she quieted
down, which she did thanks to Elisa. My sister asked cautiously: “But is it you
who want to get married at city hall or is it your fiancé?”
I explained to her, but as if I were explaining the matter to all of them, that
for me the Church hadn’t counted for a long time, but that whether I got
married at city hall or at the altar was the same to me; while for my fiancé it
was very important to have only a civil ceremony, he knew all about religious
matters  and  believed  that  religion,  however  valuable,  was  ruined  precisely
when it interfered in the affairs of the state. In other words, I concluded, if we
don’t get married at city hall, he won’t marry me.
At  that  point  my  father,  who  had  immediately  sided  with  my  mother,
suddenly stopped echoing her insults and laments.
“He won’t marry you?”
“No.”
“And what will he do, leave you?”
“We’ll go and live together in Florence without getting married.”
That  information  my  mother  considered  the  most  intolerable  of  all.  She
completely lost control, vowing that in that case she would take a knife and cut
my throat. My father instead nervously ruffled his hair, and said to her: “Be
quiet, don’t get me mad, let’s be reasonable. We know very well that someone
can get married by the priest, have a fancy celebration, and still come to a bad
end.”
He,  too,  was  obviously  alluding  to  Lila,  the  ever-vivid  scandal  of  the
neighborhood,  and  my  mother  finally  understood.  The  priest  wasn’t  a
guarantee, nothing was a guarantee in the brutal world we lived in. So she
stopped shouting and left to my father the task of examining the situation and,
if necessary, letting me have my way. But she didn’t stop pacing, with her limp,
shaking her head, insulting my future husband. What was he, the professor?
Was he a Communist? Communist and professor? Professor of that shit, she
shouted. What kind of professor is he, one who thinks like that? A shit thinks
like that. No, replied my father, what do you mean shit, he’s a man who’s
educated and knows better than anyone what disgusting things the priests do,
that’s why he wants to go and say “I do” only at city hall. Yes, you’re right, a lot
of Communists do that. Yes, you’re right, like this our daughter doesn’t seem
married. But I would trust this university professor: he loves her. I can’t believe
that he would put Lenuccia in a situation where she seems like a whore. And
anyway if we don’t want to trust him—but I do trust him, even if I don’t know
him yet: he’s an important person, the girls here dream of a match like that—at
least we can trust the city hall. I work there, at the city hall, and a marriage
there, I can assure you, is as valid as the one in church and maybe even more.
He went on for hours. My siblings at a certain point collapsed and went back
to sleep. I stayed to soothe my parents and persuade them to accept something
that  for  me,  at  that  moment,  was  an  important  sign  of  my  entrance  into
Pietro’s world. Besides, it made me feel bolder than Lila. And most of all, if I
met Nino again, I would have liked to be able to say to him, in an allusive way:
See where that argument with the religion teacher led, every choice has its
history, so many moments of our existence are shoved into a corner, waiting
for  an  outlet,  and  in  the  end  the  outlet  arrives.  But  I  would  have  been
exaggerating, in reality it was much simpler. For at least ten years the God of
childhood, already fairly weak, had been pushed aside like an old sick person,
and I felt no need for the sanctity of marriage. The essential thing was to get
out of Naples.
9.
My  family’s  horror  at  the  idea  of  a  civil  union  alone  certainly  was  not
exhausted that night, but it diminished. The next day my mother treated me as
if anything she touched—the coffee pot, the cup with the milk, the sugar bowl,
the fresh loaf of bread—were there only to lead her into the temptation to
throw it in my face. Yet she didn’t start yelling again. As for me I ignored her; I
left early in the morning, and went to start the paperwork for the installation
of the telephone. Having taken care of that business I went to Port’Alba and
wandered through the bookstores. I was determined, within a short time, to
enable myself to speak with confidence when situations like the one in Milan
arose. I chose journals and books more or less at random, and spent a lot of
money. After many hesitations, influenced by that remark of Nino’s that kept
coming to mind, I ended up getting Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality—I
knew almost nothing of Freud and the little I knew irritated me—along with a
couple of small books devoted to sex. I intended to do what I had done in the
past with schoolwork, with exams, with my thesis, what I had done with the
newspapers that Professor Galiani passed on to me or the Marxist texts that
Franco had given me. I wanted to study the contemporary world. Hard to say
what I had already taken in at that time. There had been the discussions with
Pasquale, and also with Nino. There had been some attention paid to Cuba and
Latin America. There was the incurable poverty of the neighborhood, the lost
battle of Lila. There was school, which defeated my siblings because they were
less  stubborn  than  I  was,  less  dedicated  to  sacrifice.  There  were  the  long
conversations with Franco and occasional ones with Mariarosa, now jumbled
together in a wisp of smoke. (The world is profoundly unjust and must be changed,
but  both  the  peaceful  coexistence  between  American  imperialism  and  the  Stalinist
bureaucracies,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  reformist  politics  of  the  European,  and
especially  the  Italian,  workers’  parties,  on  the  other,  are  directed  at  keeping  the
proletariat in a subordinate wait-and-see situation that throws water on the fire of
revolution, with the result that if the global stalemate wins, if social democracy wins, it
will be capital that triumphs through the centuries and the working class will fall victim
to enforced consumerism.) These stimuli had functioned, certainly they had been
working in me for a long time, occasionally they excited me. But driving that
decision to bring myself up to date by forced marches was, at least at first, I
think, the old urgency to succeed. I had long ago convinced myself that one
can train oneself to anything, even to political passion.
As I was paying, I glimpsed my novel on a shelf, and immediately looked in
another direction. Whenever I saw the book in a window, among other novels
that had just come out, I felt inside a mixture of pride and fear, a dart of
pleasure that ended in anguish. Certainly, the story had come into being by
chance,  in  twenty  days,  without  struggle,  as  a  sedative  against  depression.
Moreover, I knew what great literature was, I had done a lot of work in the
classics, and it never occurred to me, while I was writing, that I was making
something of value. But the effort of finding a form had absorbed me. And the
absorption had become that book, an object that contained me. Now I was
there, exposed, and seeing myself caused a violent pounding in my chest. I felt
that not only in my book but in novels in general there was something that
truly agitated me, a bare and throbbing heart, the same that had burst out of
my chest in that distant moment when Lila had proposed that we write a story
together. It had fallen to me to do it seriously. But was that what I wanted? To
write, to write with purpose, to write better than I had already? And to study
the stories of the past and the present to understand how they worked, and to
learn, learn everything about the world with the sole purpose of constructing
living hearts, which no one would ever do better than me, not even Lila if she
had had the opportunity?
I came out of the bookshop, I stopped in Piazza Cavour. The day was fine, Via
Foria seemed unnaturally clean and solid in spite of the scaffolding that shored
up the Galleria. I imposed on myself the usual discipline. I took out a notebook
that I had bought recently, I wished to start acting like a real writer, putting
down thoughts, observations, useful information. I read l’Unità from beginning
to end, I took notes on the things I didn’t know. I found the article by Pietro’s
father in Il Ponte and skimmed it with curiosity, but it didn’t seem as important
as Nino had claimed. Rather, it put me off for two reasons: first, Guido Airota
used the same professorial language as the man with the thick eyeglasses but
even more rigorously; second, in a passage in which he spoke about women
students (“It’s a new crowd,” he wrote, “and by all the evidence they are not
from  well-off  families,  young  ladies  in  modest  dresses  and  of  modest
upbringing who justly expect from the immense labor of their studies a future
not  of  domestic  rituals  alone”),  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  saw  an  allusion  to
myself, whether deliberate or completely unconscious. I made a note of that in
my notebook as well (What am I to the Airotas, a jewel in the crown of their broad-
mindedness?) and, not exactly in a good mood, in fact with some irritation, I
began to leaf through the Corriere della Sera.
I remember that the air was warm, and I’ve preserved an olfactory memory
—invented or real—a mixture of printed paper and fried pizza. Page after page
I  looked  at  the  headlines,  until  one  took  my  breath  away.  There  was  a
photograph of me, set amid four dense columns of type. In the background was
a  view  of  the  neighborhood,  with  the  tunnel.  The  headline  said:  Salacious
Memoirs of an Ambitious Girl: Elena Greco’s Début Novel. The byline was that of the
man with the thick eyeglasses.
10.
I was covered in a cold sweat while I read; I had the impression that I was
close to fainting. My book was treated as an occasion to assert that in the past
decade, in all areas of productive, social, and cultural life, from factories to
offices,  to  the  university,  publishing,  and  cinema,  an  entire  world  had
collapsed under the pressure of a spoiled youth, without values. Occasionally
he cited some phrase of mine, in quotation marks, to demonstrate that I was a
fitting exponent of my badly brought-up generation. In conclusion he called
me “a girl concerned with hiding her lack of talent behind titillating pages of
mediocre triviality.”
I burst into tears. It was the harshest thing I had read since the book came
out, and not in a daily with a small circulation but in the most widely read
newspaper in Italy. Most of all, the image of my smiling face seemed to me
intolerable in the middle of a text so offensive. I walked home, not before
getting rid of the Corriere. I was afraid my mother might read the review and
use it against me. I imagined that she would have liked to put it, too, in her
album, to throw in my face whenever I upset her.
I found the table set only for me. My father was at work, my mother had
gone to ask a neighbor for something or other, and my siblings had already
eaten. As I ate pasta and potatoes I reread at random some passages of my
book.  I  thought  desperately:  Maybe  it  really  is  worthless,  maybe  it  was
published only as a favor to Adele. How could I have come up with such pallid
sentences,  such  banal  observations?  And  how  sloppy,  how  many  useless
commas; I won’t write anymore. Between disgust with the food and disgust
with the book I was depressed, when Elisa arrived with a piece of paper. It
came from Signora Spagnuolo, who had kindly agreed to let her telephone
number be used by anyone who urgently needed to communicate with me. The
piece  of  paper  said  that  there  had  been  three  phone  calls,  one  from  Gina
Medotti, who ran the press office at the publisher’s, one from Adele, and one
from Pietro.
The three names, written in Signora Spagnuolo’s labored handwriting, had
the effect of giving concreteness to a thought that until a moment before had
remained in the background: the terrible words of the man with the thick
eyeglasses were spreading rapidly, and in the course of the day they would be
everywhere.  They  had  already  been  read  by  Pietro,  by  his  family,  by  the
directors of the publishing house. Maybe they had reached Nino. Maybe they
were before the eyes of my professors in Pisa. Certainly they had come to the
attention  of  Professor  Galiani  and  her  children.  And  who  knows,  even  Lila
might have read them. I burst into tears again, frightening Elisa.
“What’s wrong, Lenù?”
“I don’t feel well.”
“Shall I make you some chamomile tea?”
“Yes.”
But  there  wasn’t  time.  Someone  was  knocking  at  the  door,  it  was  Rosa
Spagnuolo. Cheerful, slightly out of breath from hurrying up the stairs, she
said that my fiancé was again looking for me, he was on the telephone, what a
lovely  voice,  what  a  lovely  northern  accent.  I  ran  to  answer,  apologizing
repeatedly  for  bothering  her.  Pietro  tried  to  console  me,  he  said  that  his
mother urged me not to be upset, the main thing was that it talked about the
book.  But,  surprising  Signora  Spagnuolo,  who  knew  me  as  a  meek  girl,  I
practically screamed, What do I care if it talks about it if it says such terrible
things?  He  urged  me  again  to  be  calm  and  added:  Tomorrow  an  article  is
coming out in l’Unità. I ended the call coldly, I said: It would be better if no one
worried about me anymore.
I couldn’t close my eyes that night. In the morning I couldn’t contain myself
and went out to get l’Unità. I leafed through it in a rush, still at the newsstand, a
few steps from the elementary school. I was again confronted by a photograph
of myself, the same that had been in the Corriere, not in the middle of the
article  this  time  but  above  it,  next  to  the  headline:  Young  Rebels  and  Old
Reactionaries: Concerning the Book by Elena Greco. I had never heard of the author
of the article, but it was certainly someone who wrote well, and his words
acted  as  a  balm.  He  praised  my  novel  wholeheartedly  and  insulted  the
prestigious professor. I went home reassured, maybe even in a good mood. I
paged  through  my  book  and  this  time  it  seemed  to  me  well  put  together,
written with mastery. My mother said sourly: Did you win the lottery? I left the
paper on the kitchen table without saying anything.
In the late afternoon Signora Spagnuolo reappeared, I was wanted again on
the telephone. In response to my embarrassment, my apologies, she said she
was  very  happy  to  be  able  to  be  useful  to  a  girl  like  me,  she  was  full  of
compliments. Gigliola had been unlucky, she sighed on the stairs, her father
had taken her to work in the Solaras’ pastry shop when she was thirteen, and
good thing she was engaged to Michele, otherwise she’d be slaving away her
whole life. She opened the door and led me along the hall to the telephone that
was attached to the wall. I saw that she had put a chair there so that I would be
comfortable: what deference was shown to someone who is educated. Studying
was considered a ploy used by the smartest kids to avoid hard work. How can I
explain to this woman—I thought—that from the age of six I’ve been a slave to
letters  and  numbers,  that  my  mood  depends  on  the  success  of  their
combinations, that the joy of having done well is rare, unstable, that it lasts an
hour, an afternoon, a night?
“Did you read it?” Adele asked.
“Yes.”
“Are you pleased?”
“Yes.”
“Then I’ll give you another piece of good news: the book is starting to sell, if
it keeps on like this we’ll reprint it.”
“What does that mean?”
“It means that our friend in the Corriere thought he was destroying us and
instead he worked for us. Bye, Elena, enjoy your success.”
11.
The book was selling really well, I realized in the following days. The most
conspicuous sign was the increasing number of phone calls from Gina, who
reported a notice in such-and-such a newspaper, or announced some invitation
from a bookstore or cultural group, without ever forgetting to greet me with
the  kind  words:  The  book  is  taking  off,  Dottoressa  Greco,  congratulations.
Thank you, I said, but I wasn’t happy. The articles in the newspapers seemed
superficial,  they  confined  themselves  to  applying  either  the  enthusiastic
matrix of l’Unità or the ruinous one of the Corriere. And although Gina repeated
on  every  occasion  that  even  negative  reviews  were  good  for  sales,  those
reviews nevertheless wounded me and I would wait anxiously for a handful of
favorable comments to offset the unfavorable ones and feel better. In any case,
I stopped hiding the malicious reviews from my mother; I handed them all
over, good and bad. She tried to read them, spelling them out with a stern
expression, but she never managed to get beyond four or five lines before she
either found a point to quarrel with or, out of boredom, took refuge in her
mania for collecting. Her aim was to fill the entire album and, afraid of being
left with empty pages, she complained when I had nothing to give her.
The review that at the time wounded me most deeply appeared in Roma.
Paragraph by paragraph, it retraced the one in the Corriere, but in a florid style
that at the end fanatically hammered at a single concept: women are losing all
restraint, one has only to read Elena Greco’s indecent novel to understand it, a
novel that is a cheap version of the already vulgar Bonjour Tristesse. What hurt
me, though, was not the content but the byline. The article was by Nino’s
father, Donato Sarratore. I thought of how impressed I had been as a girl by the
fact that that man was the author of a book of poems; I thought of the glorious
halo  I  had  enveloped  him  in  when  I  discovered  that  he  wrote  for  the
newspapers.  Why  that  review?  Did  he  wish  to  get  revenge  because  he
recognized himself in the obscene family man who seduces the protagonist? I
was tempted to call him and insult him atrociously in dialect. I gave it up only
because I thought of Nino, and made what seemed an important discovery: his
experience and mine were similar. We had both refused to model ourselves on
our families: I had been struggling forever to get away from my mother, he had
burned his bridges with his father. This similarity consoled me, and my rage
slowly diminished.
But I hadn’t taken into account that, in the neighborhood, Roma was read
more  than  any  other  newspaper.  I  found  out  that  evening.  Gino,  the
pharmacist’s son, who lifted weights and had become a muscular young man,
looked out from the doorway of his father’s shop just as I was passing, in a
white  pharmacist’s  smock  even  though  he  hadn’t  yet  taken  his  degree.  He
called to me, holding out the paper, and said, in a fairly serious tone, because
he had recently moved up a little in the local section of the neo-fascist Italian
Social Movement party: Did you see what they’re writing about you? In order
not to give him the satisfaction, I answered, they write all sorts of things, and
went on with a wave. He was flustered, and stammered something, then he
said, with explicit malice: I’ll have to read that book of yours, I understand it’s
very interesting.
That was only the start. The next day Michele Solara came up to me on the
street and insisted on buying me a coffee. We went into his bar and while
Gigliola served us, without saying a word, in fact obviously annoyed by my
presence and perhaps also by her boyfriend’s, he began: Lenù, Gino gave me an
article to read where it says you wrote a book that’s banned for those under
eighteen. Imagine that, who would have expected it. Is that what you studied in
Pisa? Is that what they taught you at the university? I can’t believe it. In my
opinion you and Lina made a secret agreement: she does nasty things and you
write them. Is that right? Tell me the truth. I turned red, I didn’t wait for the
coffee, I waved to Gigliola and left. He called after me, laughing: What’s the
matter, you’re offended, come here, I was joking.
Soon afterward I had an encounter with Carmen Peluso. My mother had
obliged me to go to the Carraccis’ new grocery, because oil was cheaper there.
It was afternoon, there were no customers, Carmen was full of compliments.
How well you look, she said, it’s an honor to be your friend, the only good luck
I’ve had in my whole life. Then she said that she had read Sarratore’s article,
but only because a supplier had left Roma behind in the shop. She described it
as  spiteful,  and  her  indignation  seemed  genuine.  On  the  other  hand,  her
brother, Pasquale, had given her the article in l’Unità—really, really good, such
a nice picture. You’re beautiful, she said, in everything you do. She had heard
from my mother that I was going to marry a university professor and that I was
going to live in Florence in a luxurious house. She, too, was getting married, to
the owner of the gas pump on the stradone, but who could say when, they had
no money. Then, without a break, she began complaining about Ada. Ever since
Ada had taken Lila’s place with Stefano, things had gone from bad to worse.
She acted like the boss in the grocery stores, too, and had it in for her, accused
her of stealing, ordered her around, watched her closely. She couldn’t take it
anymore, she wanted to quit and go to work at her future husband’s gas pump.
I listened closely, I remembered when Antonio and I wanted to get married
and, similarly, have a gas pump. I told her about it, to amuse her, but she
muttered, darkening: Yes, why not, just imagine it, you at a gas pump, lucky
you who got yourself out of this wretchedness. Then she made some obscure
comments: there’s too much injustice, Lenù, too much, it has to end, we can’t
go on like this. And as she was talking she pulled out of a drawer my book, with
the cover all creased and dirty. It was the first copy I’d seen in the hands of
anyone in the neighborhood, and I was struck by how bulging and grimy the
early pages were, how flat and white the others. I read a little at night, she said,
or when there aren’t any customers. But I’m still on page 32, I don’t have time,
I have to do everything, the Carraccis keep me shut up here from six in the
morning to nine in the evening. Then suddenly she asked, slyly, how long does
it take to get to the dirty pages? How much do I still have to read?
The dirty pages.
A little while later I ran into Ada carrying Maria, her daughter with Stefano.
I struggled to be friendly, after what Carmen had told me. I praised the child, I
said her dress was pretty and her earrings adorable. But Ada was aloof. She
spoke of Antonio, she said they wrote to each other, it wasn’t true that he was
married and had children, she said I had ruined his brain and his capacity to
love. Then she started on my book. She hadn’t read it, she explained, but she
had heard that it wasn’t a book to have in the house. And she was almost
angry: Say the child grows up and finds it, what can I do? I’m sorry, I won’t buy
it. But, she added, I’m glad you’re making money, good luck.
12.
These episodes, one after the other, led me to suspect that the book was
selling  because  both  the  hostile  newspapers  and  the  favorable  ones  had
indicated that there were some risqué passages. I went so far as to think that
Nino had alluded to Lila’s sexuality only because he thought that there was no
problem in discussing such things with someone who had written what I had
written. And via that path the desire to see my friend returned. Who knows, I
said to myself, if Lila had the book, as Carmen did. I imagined her at night, after
the factory—Enzo in solitude in one room, she with the baby beside her in the
other—exhausted  and  yet  intent  on  reading  me,  her  mouth  half  open,
wrinkling her forehead the way she did when she was concentrating. How
would she judge it? Would she, too, reduce the novel to the dirty pages? But
maybe she wasn’t reading it at all, I doubted that she had the money to buy a
copy, I ought to take her one as a present. For a while it seemed to me a good
idea, then I forgot about it. I still cared more about Lila than about any other
person, but I couldn’t make up my mind to see her. I didn’t have time, there
were too many things to study, to learn in a hurry. And then the end of our last
visit—in the courtyard of the factory, she with that apron under her coat,
standing in front of the bonfire where the pages of The Blue Fairy were burning
—had been a decisive farewell to the remains of childhood, the confirmation
that our paths by now diverged, and maybe she would say: I don’t have time to
read you, you see the life I have? I went my own way.
Whatever the reason, the book really was doing better and better. Once
Adele telephoned and, with her usual mixture of irony and affection, said: If it
keeps going like this you’ll get rich and you won’t know what to do with poor
Pietro anymore. Then she passed me on to her husband, no less. Guido, she
said, wants to talk to you. I was agitated, I had had very few conversations with
Professor Airota and they made me feel awkward. But Pietro’s father was very
friendly, he congratulated me on my success, he spoke sarcastically about the
sense of decency of my detractors, he talked about the extremely long duration
of  the  dark  ages  in  Italy,  he  praised  the  contribution  I  was  making  to  the
modernization of the country, and so on with other formulas of that sort. He
didn’t say anything specific about the novel; surely he hadn’t read it, he was a
very busy man. But it was nice that he wanted to give me a sign of approval
and respect.
Mariarosa was no less affectionate, and she, too, was full of praise. At first
she seemed on the point of talking in detail about the book, then she changed
the subject excitedly, she said she wanted to invite me to the university: it
seemed  to  her  important  that  I  should  take  part  in  what  she  called  the
unstoppable flow of events. Leave tomorrow, she urged, have you seen what’s
happening  in  France?  I  knew  all  about  it,  I  clung  to  an  old  blue  grease-
encrusted  radio  that  my  mother  kept  in  the  kitchen,  and  said  yes,  it’s
magnificent, Nanterre, the barricades in the Latin Quarter. But she seemed
much better informed, much more involved. She was planning to drive to Paris
with some of her friends, and invited me to go with her. I was tempted. I said
all right, I’ll think about it. To go to Milan, and on to France, to arrive in Paris
in  revolt,  face  the  brutality  of  the  police,  plunge  with  my  whole  personal
history into the most incandescent magma of these months, add a sequel to the
journey I’d made years earlier with Franco. How wonderful it would be to go
with Mariarosa, the only girl I knew who was so open-minded, so modern,
completely in touch with the realities of the world, almost as much a master of
political speech as the men. I admired her, there were no women who stood
out in that chaos. The young heroes who faced the violence of the reactions at
their own peril were called Rudi Dutschke, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, and, as in war
films where there were only men, it was hard to feel part of it; you could only
love  them,  adapt  their  thoughts  to  your  brain,  feel  pity  for  their  fate.  It
occurred to me that among Mariarosa’s friends there might also be Nino. They
knew  each  other,  it  was  possible.  Ah,  to  see  him,  to  be  swept  into  that
adventure, expose myself to dangers along with him. The day passed like that.
The kitchen was silent now, my parents were sleeping, my brothers were still
out wandering in the streets, Elisa was in the bathroom, washing. To leave,
tomorrow morning.
13.
I left, but not for Paris. After the elections of that turbulent year, Gina sent
me out to promote the book. I began with Florence. I had been invited to teach
by a woman professor friend of a friend of the Airotas, and I ended up in one of
those  student-run  courses,  widespread  in  that  time  of  unrest  in  the
universities,  speaking  to  around  thirty  students,  boys  and  girls.  I  was
immediately struck by the fact that many of the girls were even worse than
those described by my father-in-law in Il Ponte: badly dressed, badly made up,
muddled,  excitable,  angry  at  the  exams,  at  the  professors.  Urged  by  the
professor who had invited me, I spoke out about the student demonstrations
with manifest enthusiasm, especially the ones in France. I showed off what I
was learning; I was pleased with myself. I felt that I was expressing myself with
conviction and clarity, that the girls in particular admired the way I spoke, the
things I knew, the way I skillfully touched on the complicated problems of the
world,  arranging  them  into  a  coherent  picture.  But  I  soon  realized  that  I
tended to avoid any mention of the book. Talking about it made me uneasy, I
was  afraid  of  reactions  like  those  of  the  neighborhood,  I  preferred  to
summarize  in  my  own  words  ideas  from  Quaderni  piacentini  or  the  Monthly
Review. On the other hand I had been invited because of the book, and someone
was already asking to speak. The first questions were all about the struggles of
the female character to escape the environment where she was born. Then,
near the end, a girl I remember as being tall and thin asked me to explain,
breaking  off  her  phrases  with  nervous  laughs,  why  I  had  considered  it
necessary to write, in such a polished story, a risqué part.
I was embarrassed, I think I blushed, I jumbled together a lot of sociological
reasons. Finally, I spoke of the necessity of recounting frankly every human
experience, including—I said emphatically—what seems unsayable and what
we do not speak of even to ourselves. They liked those last words, I regained
respect. The professor who had invited me praised them, she said she would
reflect on them, she would write to me.
Her  approval  established  in  my  mind  those  few  concepts,  which  soon
became a refrain. I used them often in public, sometimes in an amusing way,
sometimes in a dramatic tone, sometimes succinctly, sometimes developing
them with elaborate verbal flourishes. I found myself especially relaxed one
evening in a bookstore in Turin, in front of a fairly large audience, which I now
faced with growing confidence. It began to seem natural that someone would
ask  me,  sympathetically  or  provocatively,  about  the  episode  of  sex  on  the
beach,  and  my  ready  response,  which  had  become  increasingly  polished,
enjoyed a certain success.
On  the  orders  of  the  publisher,  Tarratano,  Adele’s  old  friend,  had
accompanied me to Turin. He said that he was proud of having been the first to
understand the potential of my novel and introduced me to the audience with
the same enthusiastic words he had used before in Milan. At the end of the
evening he congratulated me on the great progress I had made in a short time.
Then he asked me, in his usual good-humored way: why are you so willing to
let your erotic pages be called “risqué,” why do you yourself describe them
that way in public? And he explained to me that I shouldn’t: my novel wasn’t
simply  the  episode  on  the  beach,  there  were  more  interesting  and  finer
passages;  and  then,  if  here  and  there  something  sounded  daring,  that  was
mainly because it had been written by a girl; obscenity, he said, is not alien to
good literature, and the true art of the story, even if it goes beyond the bounds
of decency, is never risqué.
I was confused. That very cultured man was tactfully explaining to me that
the sins of my book were venial, and that I was wrong to speak of them every
time as if they were mortal. I was overdoing it, then. I was submitting to the
public’s myopia, its superficiality. I said to myself: Enough, I have to be less
subservient, I have to learn to disagree with my readers, I shouldn’t descend to
their level. And I decided that at the first opportunity I would be more severe
with anyone who wanted to talk about those pages.
At dinner, in the hotel restaurant where the press office had reserved a table
for us, I listened, half embarrassed, half amused, as Tarratano quoted, as proof
that I was essentially a chaste writer, Henry Miller, and explained, calling me
dear child, that not a few very gifted writers of the twenties and thirties could
and did write about sex in a way that I at the moment couldn’t even imagine. I
wrote down their names in my notebook, but meanwhile I began to think: This
man, in spite of his compliments, doesn’t consider that I have much talent; in
his eyes I’m a girl who’s had an undeserved success; even the pages that most
attract readers he doesn’t consider outstanding, they may scandalize those
who don’t know much but not people like him.
I said that I was a little tired and helped my companion, who had drunk too
much,  to  get  up.  He  was  a  small  man  but  had  the  prominent  belly  of  a
gourmand.  Tufts  of  white  hair  bristled  over  large  ears,  he  had  a  red  face
interrupted by a narrow mouth, a big nose, and very bright eyes; he smoked a
lot, and his fingers were yellowed. In the elevator he tried to kiss me. Although
I wriggled out of his embrace I had a hard time keeping him away; he wouldn’t
give up. The touch of his stomach and his winey breath stayed with me. At the
time, it would never have occurred to me that an old man, so respectable, so
cultured, that man who was such a good friend of my future mother-in-law,
could behave in an unseemly way. Once we were in the corridor he hastened to
apologize, he blamed the wine, and went straight to his room.
14.
The next day, at breakfast and during the entire drive to Milan, he talked
passionately about what he considered the most exciting period of his life, the
years between 1945 and 1948. I heard in his voice a genuine melancholy, which
vanished,  however,  when  he  went  on  to  describe  with  an  equally  genuine
enthusiasm  the  new  climate  of  revolution,  the  energy—he  said—that  was
infusing young and old. I kept nodding yes, struck by how important it was for
him to convince me that my present was in fact the return of his thrilling past.
I felt a little sorry for him. A random biographical hint led me, at a certain
point, to make a quick calculation: the person with me was fifty-eight years
old.
Once in Milan I had the driver drop me near the publishing house, and I said
goodbye to my companion. I had slept badly and was in something of a daze.
On  the  street  I  tried  to  eradicate  my  disgust  at  that  physical  contact  with
Tarratano, but I still felt the stain of it and a confusing continuity with a kind
of  vulgarity  I  recognized  from  the  neighborhood.  At  the  publisher’s  I  was
greeted warmly. It wasn’t the courtesy of a few months earlier but a sort of
generalized satisfaction that meant: how clever we were to guess that you were
clever. Even the switchboard operator, the only one there who had treated me
condescendingly, came out of her booth and embraced me. And for the first
time the editor who had done that punctilious editing invited me to lunch.
As  soon  as  we  sat  down  in  a  half-empty  restaurant  near  the  office,  he
returned to his emphasis on the fact that my writing guarded a fascinating
secret, and between courses he suggested that I would do well to plan a new
novel,  taking  my  time  but  not  resting  too  long  on  my  laurels.  Then  he
reminded  me  that  I  had  an  appointment  at  the  state  university  at  three.
Mariarosa had nothing to do with it; the publishing house itself, through its
own  channels,  had  organized  something  with  a  group  of  students.  Whom
should I look for when I get there? I asked. My authoritative lunch companion
said proudly: My son will be waiting for you at the entrance.
I retrieved my bag from the office, and went to the hotel. I stayed a few
minutes and left for the university. The heat was unbearable. I found myself
against a background of posters dense with writing, red flags, and struggling
people,  placards  announcing  activities,  noisy  voices,  laughter,  and  a
widespread sense of apprehension. I wandered around, looking for signs that
had to do with me. I recall a dark-haired young man who, running, rudely
bumped into me, lost his balance, picked himself up, and ran out into the street
as if he were being pursued, even though no one was behind him. I recall the
pure, solitary sound of a trumpet that pierced the suffocating air. I recall a tiny
blond girl, who was dragging a clanking chain with a large lock at the end, and
zealously shouting, I don’t know to whom: I’m coming! I remember it because
in order to seem purposeful, as I waited for someone to recognize me and come
over, I took out my notebook and wrote down this and that. But half an hour
passed, and no one arrived. Then I examined the placards and posters more
carefully, hoping to find my name, or the title of the book. It was useless. I felt
a little nervous, and decided not to stop one of the students: I was ashamed to
cite my book as a subject of discussion in an environment where the posters
pasted to the walls proclaimed far more significant themes. I found to my
annoyance that I was poised between opposing feelings: on the one hand, a
strong sympathy for all those young men and women who in that place were
flaunting, gestures and voices, with an absolute lack of discipline, and, on the
other, the fear that the disorder I had been fleeing since I was a child might,
now, right here, seize me and fling me into the middle of the commotion,
where an incontrovertible power—a Janitor, a Professor, the Rector, the Police
—would  quickly  find  me  at  fault,  me,  me  who  had  always  been  good,  and
punish me.
I thought of sneaking away, what did I care about a handful of kids scarcely
younger than me, to whom I would say the usual foolish things? I wanted to go
back to the hotel, enjoy my situation as a successful author who was traveling
all over, eating in restaurants and sleeping in hotels. But five or six busy-
looking girls passed by, carrying bags, and almost against my will I followed
them, the voices, the shouts, even the sound of the trumpet. Like that, walking
and walking, I ended up outside a crowded classroom from which, just then, an
angry  clamor  arose.  And  since  the  girls  I  was  following  went  in,  I,  too,
cautiously entered.
A  sharp  conflict  involving  various  factions  was  under  way,  both  in  the
packed classroom and in a small crowd that besieged the lectern. I stayed near
the door, ready to leave, already repelled by a burning cloud of smoke and
breath, by a strong odor of excitement.
I tried to orient myself. I think they were discussing procedural matters, in
an atmosphere, however, in which no one—some were shouting, some were
silent, some poking fun, some laughing, some moving rapidly like runners on a
battlefield, some paying no attention, some studying—seemed to think that
agreement  was  possible.  I  hoped  that  Mariarosa  was  there  somewhere.
Meanwhile  I  was  getting  used  to  the  uproar,  the  smells.  So  many  people:
mostly  males,  handsome,  ugly,  well-dressed,  scruffy,  violent,  frightened,
amused. I observed the women with interest; I had the impression that I was
the only one who was there alone. Some—for example the ones I had followed
—stayed  close  together,  even  as  they  distributed  leaflets  in  the  crowded
classroom:  they  shouted  together,  laughed  together,  and  if  they  were
separated by a few meters they kept an eye on each other so as not to get lost.
Longtime friends or perhaps chance acquaintances, they seemed to draw from
the group the authority to stay in that place of chaos, seduced by the lawless
atmosphere, yes, but open to the experience only on the condition that they
not separate, as if they had decided beforehand, in more secure places, that if
one left they would all leave. Other women, however, by themselves or at most
in pairs, had infiltrated the male groups, displaying a provocative intimacy, the
lighthearted dissolution of safe distances, and they seemed to me the happiest,
the most aggressive, the proudest.
I felt different, there illegally, without the necessary credentials to shout
myself, to remain inside those fumes and those odors that brought to mind,
now, the odors and fumes that came from Antonio’s body, from his breath,
when we embraced at the ponds. I had been too wretched, too crushed by the
obligation to excel in school. I had hardly ever gone to the movies. I had never
bought records, yet how I would have liked to. I wasn’t a fan of any singers,
hadn’t rushed to concerts, collected autographs; I had never been drunk, and
my  limited  sexual  experiences  had  taken  place  uncomfortably,  amid
subterfuges, fearfully. Those girls, on the other hand, to varying degrees, must
have grown up in easier circumstances, and were more prepared to change
their skin; maybe they felt their presence in that place, in that atmosphere, not
as a derailment but as a just and urgent choice. Now that I have some money, I
thought, now that I’ll earn who knows how much, I can have some of the
things  I  missed.  Or  maybe  not,  I  was  now  too  cultured,  too  ignorant,  too
controlled, too accustomed to freezing life by storing up ideas and facts, too
close to marriage and settling down, in short too obtusely fixed within an
order that here appeared to be in decline. That last thought frightened me. Get
out of this place right away, I said to myself, every gesture or word is an insult
to the work I’ve done. Instead I slipped farther inside the crowded classroom.
I was struck immediately by a very beautiful girl, with delicate features and
long black hair that hung over her shoulders, who was certainly younger than
me. I couldn’t take my eyes off her. She was standing in the midst of some
combative young men, and behind her a dark man about thirty, smoking a
cigar,  stood  glued  to  her  like  a  bodyguard.  What  distinguished  her  in  that
environment, besides her beauty, was that she was holding in her arms a baby
a few months old, she was nursing him and, at the same time, closely following
the  conflict,  and  occasionally  even  shouting  something.  When  the  baby,  a
patch of blue, with his little reddish-colored legs and feet uncovered, detached
his mouth from the nipple, she didn’t put her breast back in the bra but stayed
like that, exposed, her white shirt unbuttoned, her breast swollen, her mouth
half open, frowning, until she realized the child was no longer suckling and
mechanically tried to reattach him.
That  girl  disturbed  me.  In  the  noisy  smoke-filled  classroom,  she  was  an
incongruous icon of maternity. She was younger than me, she had a refined
appearance, responsibility for an infant. Yet she seemed determined to reject
the persona of the young woman placidly absorbed in caring for her child. She
yelled, she gesticulated, she asked to speak, she laughed angrily, she pointed to
someone with contempt. And yet the child was part of her, he sought her
breast,  he  lost  it.  Together  they  made  up  a  fragile  image,  at  risk,  close  to
breaking, as if it had been painted on glass: the child would fall out of her arms
or something would bump his head, an elbow, an uncontrolled movement. I
was happy when, suddenly, Mariarosa appeared beside her. Finally: there she
was. How lively, how bright, how cordial she was: she seemed to be friendly
with the young mother. I waved my hand, she didn’t see me. She whispered
briefly  in  the  girl’s  ear,  disappeared,  reappeared  in  the  crowd  that  was
gathered around the lectern. Meanwhile, through a side door, a small group
burst in whose mere arrival calmed people down. Mariarosa signaled, waited
for a signal in response, grabbed the megaphone, and spoke a few words that
silenced the packed classroom. For a few seconds I had the impression that
Milan, the tensions of that period, my own excitement had the power to let the
shadows I had in my head emerge. How many times had I thought in those
days of my early political education? Mariarosa yielded the megaphone to a
young man beside her, whom I recognized immediately. It was Franco Mari, my
boyfriend from the early years in Pisa.
15.
He had stayed the same: the same warm and persuasive tone of voice, the
same ability to organize a speech, moving from general statements that led,
step by step, in a logical sequence to ordinary, everyday experiences, revealing
their meaning. As I write, I realize that I recall very little of his physical aspect,
only his pale clean-shaven face, his short hair. And yet his was the only body
that, so far, I had been close to as if we were married.
I  went  over  to  Franco  after  his  speech,  and  his  eyes  lighted  up  with
amazement, he embraced me. But it was hard to talk, someone pulled him by
the arm, someone else had started to criticize, pointing at him insistently, as if
he had to answer for terrible crimes. I stayed near the lectern, uneasy; in the
crush I had lost Mariarosa. But this time it was she who saw me, and she tugged
on my arm.
“What are you doing here?” she asked, pleased.
I avoided explaining that I had missed an appointment, that I had arrived by
chance. I said, indicating Franco: “I know him.”
“Mari?”
“Yes.”
She spoke about Franco enthusiastically, then she whispered: They’ll make
me pay for it, I invited him, look what a hornets’ nest. And since he was going
to stay at her house and leave for Turin the following day, she immediately
insisted that I should come and stay with her, too. I accepted, too bad about the
hotel.
The meeting dragged on, there were moments of extreme tension, and a
permanent sensation of alarm. It was getting dark when we left the university.
Besides Franco, Mariarosa was joined by the young mother, whose name was
Silvia, and the man around thirty whom I had noticed in the classroom, the one
who was smoking the cigar, a Venezuelan painter named Juan. We all went to
dinner in a trattoria that my sister-in-law knew. I talked to Franco enough to
find out that I was wrong, he hadn’t stayed the same. Covering his face—and
maybe he had placed it there himself—a mask, which, although it perfectly
matched the features of before, had eliminated the generosity. Now he was
pinched, restrained, he weighed his words. In the course of a short, apparently
confidential exchange, he never alluded to our old relationship, and when I
brought it up, complaining that he had never written to me, he cut me off,
saying: It had to be like that. About the university, too, he was vague, and I
understood that he hadn’t graduated.
“There are other things to do,” he said.
“What?”
He  turned  to  Marirosa,  as  if  irritated  by  the  too  private  note  of  our
exchange:
“Elena is asking what there is to do.”
Mariarosa answered cheerfully: “The revolution.”
So I assumed a mocking tone, I said: “And in your free time?”
Juan, who was sitting next to Silvia, broke in seriously, gently shaking the
baby’s closed fist. “In our free time we’re getting ready for it.”
After dinner we piled into Mariarosa’s car; she lived in a large old apartment
in Sant’Ambrogio. I discovered that the Venezuelan had a kind of studio there,
a very untidy room where he brought Franco and me to show us his work: big
canvases  depicting  crowded  urban  scenes,  painted  with  an  almost
photographic skill, but he had spoiled them by nailing to the surface tubes of
paint  or  brushes  or  palettes  or  bowls  for  turpentine  and  rags.  Mariarosa
praised him warmly, but addressing Franco in particular, whose opinion she
seemed to value.
I  observed,  without  comprehending.  Certainly  Juan  lived  there,  certainly
Silvia also lived there, since she moved through the house confidently with
Mirko, the baby. But at first I thought that the painter and the young mother
were a couple and lived as tenants in one of those rooms, but soon I changed
my  idea.  The  Venezuelan,  in  fact,  all  evening  showed  Silvia  an  abstracted
courtesy, while he often put an arm around Mariarosa’s shoulders and once he
kissed her on the neck.
At first there was a lot of talk about Juan’s work. Franco had always had an
enviable expertise in the visual arts and a strong critical sensibility. We all
listened eagerly, except Silvia, whose  baby, until then very good, suddenly
began to cry inconsolably. For a while I hoped that Franco would also talk
about my book, I was sure he would say something intelligent, such as, with
some severity, he was saying about Juan’s paintings. Instead no one alluded to
my novel, and, after a burst of impatience from the Venezuelan, who hadn’t
appreciated a remark of Franco’s on art and society, we went on to discuss
Italy’s  cultural  backwardness,  the  political  picture  that  emerged  from  the
elections, the chain-reaction concessions of social democracy, the students and
police repression, what was termed the lesson of France. The exchange between
the two men immediately became contentious. Silvia couldn’t understand what
Mirko needed. She left the room and returned, scolding him harshly as if he
were a grown child, and then, from the long hall where she was carrying him
up and down or from the room where she had gone to change him, shouted out
clichéd phrases of dissent. Mariarosa, after describing the nurseries organized
at the Sorbonne for the children of the striking students, evoked a Paris of
early June, rainy and cold, still paralyzed by the general strike—not at first
hand (she regretted it, she hadn’t managed to get there) but as a friend had
described it to her in a letter. Franco and Juan both listened distractedly, and
yet never lost the thread of their argument; rather, they confronted each other
with increasing animosity.
The result was that we found ourselves, we three women, in the situation of
drowsy  heifers  waiting  for  the  two  bulls  to  complete  the  testing  of  their
powers.  This  irritated  me.  I  waited  for  Mariarosa  to  intervene  in  the
conversation again; I intended to do so myself. But Franco and Juan left us no
space; the baby meanwhile was screaming and Silvia treated him even more
aggressively. Lila—I thought—was even younger when she had Gennaro. And I
realized that something had driven me, even during the meeting, to establish a
connection between Silvia and Lila. Maybe it was the solitude as a mother that
Lila had felt after the disappearance of Nino and the break with Stefano. Or her
beauty: if she had been at that meeting with Gennaro she would have been an
even more captivating, more determined mother than Silvia. But Lila was now
cut off. The wave that I had felt in the classroom would reach as far as San
Giovanni a Teduccio; but she, in that place where she had ended up, demeaning
herself, would never be aware of it. A pity, I felt guilty. I should have carried
her off, kidnapped her, made her travel with me. Or at least reinforced her
presence in my body, mixed her voice with mine. As in that moment. I heard
her saying: If you are silent, if you let only the two of them speak, if you behave
like an apartment plant, at least give that girl a hand, think what it means to
have a small child. It was a confusion of space and time, of distant moods. I
jumped up, I took the child from Silvia gently and carefully, and she was glad
to let me.
16.
What a handsome child: it was a memorable moment. Mirko charmed me
immediately; he had folds of rosy flesh around his wrists, around his legs. How
cute  he  was,  what  a  nice  shape  his  eyes  had,  how  much  hair,  what  long,
delicate feet, what a good smell. I whispered all those compliments, softly, as I
carried him around the house. The voices of the men faded, as did the ideas
they defended and their hostility, and something happened that was new to
me. I felt pleasure. I felt, like an uncontrollable flame, the child’s warmth, his
motility, and it seemed to me that all my senses became more vigilant, as if the
perception of that perfect fragment of life that I had in my arms had become
achingly acute, and I felt his sweetness and my responsibility for him, and was
prepared to protect him from all the evil shadows lying in wait in the dark
corners of the house. Mirko must have understood and he was quiet. This, too,
gave me pleasure, I was proud of having been able to give him peace.
When I returned to the room, Silvia, who had settled herself on Mariarosa’s
lap and was listening to the discussion between the two men, joining in with
nervous exclamations, turned to look at me and must have seen in my face the
pleasure with which I was hugging the child to me. She jumped up, took him
from  me  with  a  harsh  thank  you,  and  went  to  put  him  to  bed.  I  had  an
unpleasant  sensation  of  loss.  I  felt  Mirko’s  warmth  leaving  me,  I  sat  down
again, in a bad mood, with my thoughts in confusion. I wanted the baby back, I
hoped that he would start crying again, that Silvia would ask for my help.
What’s got into me? Do I want children? Do I want to be a mamma, nursing and
singing lullabies? Marriage plus pregnancy? And if my mother should emerge
from my stomach just now when I think I’m safe?
17.
It took me a while to focus on the lesson that was coming to us from France,
on the tense confrontation between the two men. But I didn’t want to be silent.
I wanted to say something about what I had read and thought about the events
in  Paris,  the  speech  was  twisting  around  in  sentences  that  remained
incomplete in my mind. And it amazed me that Mariarosa, so clever, so free,
said nothing, that she confined herself to agreeing always and only with what
Franco said, with pretty smiles, which made Juan nervous and occasionally
insecure. If she doesn’t speak, I said to myself, I will, otherwise why did I agree
to come here, why didn’t I go to the hotel? Questions to which I had an answer.
I wanted to show those who had known me in the past what I had become. I
wanted Franco to realize that he couldn’t treat me like the girl of long ago, I
wanted  him  to  realize  that  I  had  become  a  completely  different  person,  I
wanted him to say in front of Mariarosa that this other person had his respect.
Therefore, since the baby was quiet, since Silvia had disappeared with him,
since neither one had further need of me, I waited a little and finally found a
way of disagreeing with my old boyfriend. It was an improvised disagreement:
I wasn’t moved by solid convictions, the goal was to express myself against
Franco and I did it, I had certain formulas in my mind, I combined them with
false confidence. I said more or less that I was puzzled by the development of
the class struggle in France, that I found the student-worker alliance for the
moment very abstract. I spoke with decision, I was afraid that one of the two
men would interrupt me to say something that would rekindle the argument
between them. Instead, they listened to me attentively, all of them, including
Silvia,  who  had  returned  almost  on  tiptoe,  without  the  baby.  And  neither
Franco nor Juan gave signs of impatience while I spoke, in fact the Venezuelan
agreed when, two or three times, I uttered the word “people.” This annoyed
Mari. You’re saying that the situation isn’t objectively revolutionary, he said
emphatically, sarcastically, and I recognized that tone, it meant that he would
defend himself by making fun of me. So the sentences piled up, mine on top of
his and vice versa: I don’t know what objectively means; it means that to act is
inevitable; so if it’s not inevitable, you sit on your hands; no, the task of the
revolutionary is always to do what’s possible; in France the students have done
the impossible, the mechanism of instruction is broken and will never be fixed;
admit that things have changed and they will change; yes, but no one asked
you or anyone else for certification on official paper or for a guarantee that the
situation is objectively revolutionary, the students have acted and that’s all; it’s
not true; it is true. And so on. Until at the same moment we were silent.
It was an odd exchange, not in its content but in its heated tones, the rules of
etiquette abandoned. In Mariarosa’s eyes I glimpsed a flash of amusement: she
understood that if Franco and I talked to each other like that there had been
something more than a friendship between university colleagues. Come, give
me a hand, she said to Silvia and Juan. She had to get a ladder, to find sheets for
me, for Franco. The two followed her, Juan whispered something in her ear.
Franco stared at the floor for a moment, he pressed his lips together as if to
restrain a smile, and said affectionately: “You’ve remained the petit bourgeois
you always were.”
That was the way, years earlier, he had often made fun of me when I was
afraid  of  being  caught  in  his  room.  In  the  absence  of  the  others,  I  said
impetuously:  “You’re  the  petit  bourgeois,  by  origin,  by  education,  by
behavior.”
“I didn’t mean to offend you.”
“I’m not offended.”
“You’ve changed, you’ve become aggressive.”
“I’m the same as ever.”
“Everything all right at home?”
“Yes.”
“And that friend of yours who was so important to you?”
The question came with a logical leap that disoriented me. Had I talked to
him about Lila in the past? In what terms? And why did she come to mind
now? Where was the connection that he had seen somewhere and I hadn’t?
“She’s fine,” I said.
“What is she doing?”
“She works in a sausage factory on the outskirts of Naples.”
“Didn’t she marry a shopkeeper?”
“The marriage didn’t work.”
“When I come to Naples you must introduce me.”
“Of course.”
“Leave me a number, an address.”
“All right.”
He looked at me to assess what words would be least hurtful, and asked: “Has
she read your book?”
“I don’t know, did you read it?”
“Of course.”
“How did it seem to you?”
“Good.”
“In what way?”
“There are wonderful passages.”
“Which ones?
“Those  where  you  give  the  protagonist  the  capacity  to  put  together  the
fragments of things in her own way.”
“And that’s all?”
“Isn’t that enough?”
“No: it’s clear that you didn’t like it.”
“I told you it’s good.”
I knew him, he was trying not to humiliate me. That exasperated me, I said:
“It’s a book that’s inspired discussion, it’s selling well.”
“So good, no?”
“Yes, but not for you. What is it that doesn’t work?”
He compressed his lips again, and made up his mind: “There’s not much
depth, Elena. Behind the petty love affairs and the desire for social ascent you
hide precisely what it would be valuable to tell.”
“What?”
“Forget  it,  it’s  late,  we  should  go  to  sleep.”  And  he  tried  to  assume  an
expression of benevolent irony, but in reality he had that new tone of someone
who has an important task to complete and gives only sparingly to all the rest:
“You did everything possible, right? But this, objectively, is not the moment
for writing novels.”
18.
Mariarosa  returned  just  then  along  with  Juan  and  Silvia,  carrying  clean
towels and nightclothes. She certainly heard that last phrase, and surely she
understood that we were talking about my book, but she didn’t say a word. She
could have said that she had liked the book, that novels can be written at any
moment, but she didn’t. From that I deduced that, beyond the declarations of
liking and affection, in those circles that were so caught up and sucked in by
political passions my book was considered an insignificant little thing, and the
pages that were helping its circulation either were judged cheap versions of
much more sensational texts that I had never read, or deserved that dismissive
label of Franco’s: a story of petty love affairs.
My sister-in-law showed me the bathroom and my room with a fleeting
courtesy. I said goodbye to Franco, who was leaving early. I merely shook his
hand, and he made no move to embrace me. I saw him disappear into a room
with Mariarosa, and from Juan’s dark expression and Silvia’s unhappy look I
understood that the guest and the mistress of the house would sleep together.
I withdrew into the room assigned to me. There was a strong smell of stale
smoke, an unmade single bed, no night table, no lamp except the weak ceiling
light, newspapers piled up on the floor, some issues of journals like Menabò,
Nuovo  impegno,  Marcatré,  expensive  art  books,  some  well-thumbed,  others
evidently never opened. Under the bed I found an ashtray overflowing with
cigarette butts; I opened the window, and put it on the sill. I got undressed. The
nightgown that Mariarosa had given me was too long, too tight. I went to the
bathroom barefoot, along the shadowy corridor. The absence of a toothbrush
didn’t bother me: I hadn’t grown up brushing my teeth, it was a recent habit,
acquired in Pisa.
In bed I tried to erase the Franco I had met that night by superimposing the
Franco of years earlier, the rich, generous youth who had loved me, who had
helped me, who had bought everything for me, who had educated me, who had
taken me to Paris for his political meetings and on vacation to Versilia, to his
parents’  house.  But  I  was  unsuccessful.  The  present,  with  its  unrest,  the
shouting in the packed classroom, the political jargon that was buzzing in my
head and spilling out onto my book, vilifying it, prevailed. Was I deluded about
my literary future? Was Franco right, there were other things to do besides
write novels? What impression had I made on him? What memory did he have
of our love, if he even had one? Was he complaining about me to Mariarosa as
Nino had complained to me about Lila? I felt wounded, disheartened. Certainly
what I had imagined as a pleasant and perhaps slightly melancholy evening
seemed to me sad. I couldn’t wait for the night to pass so that I could return to
Naples. I had to get up to turn out the light. I went back to bed in the dark.
I had trouble falling asleep. I tossed and turned, the bed and the room had
the odors of other bodies, an intimacy similar to that of my house but in this
case made up of the traces of possibly repulsive strangers. Then I fell asleep,
but I woke suddenly: someone had come into the room. I whispered: Who’s
there? Juan answered. He said, straight out, in a pleading voice, as if he were
asking an important favor, like some form of first aid: “Can I sleep with you?”
The request seemed to me so absurd that, to wake myself completely, to
understand, I asked: “Sleep?”
“Yes, lie next to you, I won’t bother you, I just don’t want to be alone.”
“Absolutely not.”
“Why?”
I didn’t know what to say. I murmured: “I’m engaged.”
“So what? We’ll sleep, that’s all.”
“Go away, please, I don’t even know you.”
“I’m Juan, I showed you my work, what else do you want?”
I felt him sit down on the bed, I saw his dark profile, I felt his breath that
smelled of cigars.
“Please,” I said, “I’m sleepy.”
“You’re a writer, you write about love. Everything that happens to us feeds
the imagination and helps us to create. Let me be near you, it’s something
you’ll be able to write about.”
He touched my foot with the tips of his fingers. I couldn’t bear it, I leaped up
and turned on the light. He was still sitting on the bed, in underpants and
undershirt.
“Out,” I hissed and in such a peremptory tone, so clearly close to shouting,
so determined to attack and to fight with all my energy, that he got up, slowly,
and said with disgust: “You’re a hypocrite.”
He went out. I closed the door behind him, there was no key.
I was appalled, I was furious, I was frightened, a bloodthirsty dialogue was
whirling in my head. I waited a while before going back to bed, and I didn’t
turn out the light. What had I intimated about myself, what sort of person did
it seem that I was, what legitimatized Juan’s request? Was it the reputation of a
free woman that my book was giving me? Was it the political words I had
uttered, which evidently were not only a dialectical jousting, a game to prove
that I was as skillful as a man, but defined the entire person, sexual availability
included? Was it a sort of membership in the same ranks that had led that man
to show up in my room without scruples, and Mariarosa, also without scruples,
to lead Franco into hers? Or had I been contaminated myself by the diffuse
erotic  excitement  that  I  had  felt  in  the  university  classroom,  and  that,
unaware,  I  gave  off?  In  Milan  I  always  felt  ready  to  make  love  with  Nino,
betraying Pietro. But that was an old passion, it justified sexual desire and
betrayal, while sex in itself, that unmediated demand for orgasm, no, I couldn’t
be  drawn  into  that.  I  was  unprepared;  it  disgusted  me.  Why  let  myself  be
touched  by  Adele’s  friend  in  Turin,  why  in  this  house  by  Juan,  what  did  I
display,  what  did  they  want  to  display?  Suddenly  I  thought  of  what  had
happened with Donato Sarratore. Not so much the evening on the beach in
Ischia, which I had transformed into the episode in the novel, but the time he
appeared in Nella’s kitchen, when I had just gone to bed, and he had kissed me,
touched me, causing a flow of pleasure against my very will. Between the girl
of then, astonished, frightened, and the woman attacked in the elevator, the
woman  who  had  been  subjected  to  that  incursion  now,  was  there  a
connection?  The  extremely  cultured  friend  of  Adele’s  Tarratano,  the
Venezuelan  artist  Juan,  were  they  of  the  same  clay  as  Nino’s  father,  train
conductor, bad poet, hack journalist?
19.
I couldn’t get to sleep. Added to my strained nerves, to the contradictory
thoughts, was Mirko, who had started crying again. I recalled the powerful
emotion I had felt when I held the child in my arms and, since he didn’t calm
down, I couldn’t restrain myself. I got up, and, following the trail of his wailing,
reached a door through which light filtered. I knocked, Silvia answered rudely.
The room was more welcoming than mine, it had an old armoire, a night table,
a double bed on which the girl was sitting, in baby-doll pink, legs crossed, a
spiteful expression on her face. Her arms flung wide, the backs of both hands
on the sheet, she was holding Mirko on her bare thighs, like a votive offering:
he, too, was naked, violet, the black hole of his mouth opened wide, his little
eyes narrowed, his limbs agitated. At first she greeted me with hostility, then
she softened. She said she felt she was an incompetent mother, she didn’t
know what to do, she was desperate. Finally she said: He always acts like this if
he doesn’t eat, maybe he’s sick, he’ll die here on the bed, and as she spoke she
seemed  very  unlike  Lila—ugly,  disfigured  by  the  nervous  twisting  of  her
mouth, by her staring eyes. Until she burst into tears.
The weeping of mother and child moved me, I would have liked to embrace
them  both,  hold  them  tight,  rock  them.  I  whispered:  Can  I  take  him  for  a
moment? She nodded yes between her sobs. So I took the child off her knees,
brought him to my breast, and again felt the flood of odors, sounds, warmth, as
if his vital energies were rushing joyfully to return to me, after the separation.
I walked back and forth in the room murmuring a sort of ungrammatical litany
that  I  invented  on  the  spot,  a  long  senseless  declaration  of  love.  Mirko
miraculously calmed down, fell asleep. I laid him gently beside his mother, but
with no desire to be separated from him. I was afraid to go back to my room, a
part of me was sure of finding Juan there and wanted to stay here.
Silvia thanked me without gratitude, a thank you to which she coldly added
a list of my virtues: You’re intelligent, you know how to do everything, you
know how to be respected, you’re a real mother, your children will be lucky. I
denied it, I said I’m going. But she had a jolt of anxiety, she took my hand, and
begged me to stay: He listens to you, do it for him, he’ll sleep peacefully. I
accepted immediately. We lay down on the bed with the baby in the middle,
and turned off the light. But we didn’t sleep, we began to talk about ourselves.
In the dark Silvia became less hostile. She told me of the disgust she had felt
when she discovered she was pregnant. She had hidden the pregnancy from
the man she loved and also from herself, she was sure it would pass like an
illness  that  has  to  run  its  course.  Meanwhile,  however,  her  body  reacted,
changing  shape.  She  had  had  to  tell  her  parents,  wealthy  professionals  in
Monza. There had been a scene, she had left home. But, instead of admitting
that she had let months pass, waiting for a miracle, instead of confessing that
physical fear had prevented her from considering abortion, she had claimed
that she wanted the child, for love of the man who had made her pregnant. He
had said to her: If you want him, for love of you I want him, too. Love her, love
him: at that moment they were both serious. But after several months, even
before the pregnancy reached its end, they had both fallen out of love. Silvia
insisted  over  and  over  on  this  point,  sorrowfully.  Nothing  remained,  only
bitterness. So she had found herself alone and if until now she had managed to
get by, it was thanks to Mariarosa, whom she praised abundantly, she spoke of
her rapturously, a wonderful teacher and truly on the side of the students, an
invaluable companion.
I told her that the whole Airota family was admirable, that I was engaged to
Pietro, that we would be married in the fall. She said impetuously: Marriage
horrifies me and so does the family, it’s all old stuff. Abruptly her tone became
melancholy.
“Mirko’s father also works at the university.”
“Yes?”
“It all began because I took his course. He was so assured, so competent, very
intelligent, handsome. He had all the virtues. And even before the student
struggles  began  he  said:  Re-educate  your  professors,  don’t  be  treated  like
beasts.”
“Does he take any interest in the baby?”
She laughed in the darkness, she murmured bitterly: “A male, apart from the
mad moments when you love him and he enters you, always remains outside.
So afterward, when you no longer love him, it bothers you just to think that
you once wanted him. He liked me, I liked him, the end. It happens to me many
times a day—I’m attracted to someone. That doesn’t happen to you? It lasts a
short time, then it passes. Only the child remains, he’s part of you; the father,
on the other hand, was a stranger and goes back to being a stranger. Even the
name no longer has the sound it used to. Nino, I’d say, and I would repeat it,
over and over in my head, as soon as I woke up, it was a magic word. Now,
though, it’s a sound that makes me sad.”
I  didn’t  say  anything  for  a  while,  finally  I  whispered:  “Mirko’s  father  is
named Nino?”
“Yes, everyone knows him, he’s very famous at the university.”
“Nino what?”
“Nino Sarratore.”
20.
I went out early, leaving Silvia sleeping with the child at her breast. Of the
painter I found no trace. I managed to say goodbye only to Mariarosa, who had
got up very early to take Franco to the station and had just returned. She
looked sleepy, and seemed uneasy. She asked: “Did you sleep well?”
“I talked to Silvia a lot.”
“She told you about Sarratore?”
“Yes.”
“I know you’re friends.”
“Did he tell you?”
“Yes. We gossiped a little about you.”
“Is it true that Mirko is his son?”
“Yes.” She repressed a yawn, she smiled. “Nino is fascinating, the girls fight
over him, they drag him this way and that. And these, luckily, are happy times,
you take what you want, all the more since he has a power that conveys joy
and the desire to act.”
She said that the movement needed people like him. She said that it was
necessary,  however,  to  look  after  him,  let  him  grow,  direct  him.  The  very
capable people, she said, should be guided: in them the bourgeois democrat,
the  technical  manager,  the  modernizer  is  always  lying  in  wait.  We  both
regretted that we had spent so little time together and vowed to do better on
the next occasion. I picked up my bag at the hotel, and left.
Only  on  the  train,  during  the  long  journey  to  Naples,  did  I  take  in  that
second paternity of Nino’s. A squalid desolation extended from Silvia to Lila,
from Mirko to Gennaro. It seemed to me that the passion of Ischia, the night of
love in Forio, the secret relationship of Piazza dei Martiri, and the pregnancy––
all faded, were reduced to a mechanical device that Nino, upon leaving Naples,
had activated with Silvia and who knows how many others. The thing offended
me, as if Lila were squatting in a corner of my mind and I felt her feelings. I was
bitter  as  she  would  have  been  if  she  had  known,  I  was  furious  as  if  I  had
suffered the same wrong. Nino had betrayed Lila and me. We were, she and I,
similarly humiliated, we loved him without ever being truly loved in return.
And so, in spite of his virtues, he was a frivolous, superficial man, an animal
organism who dripped sweat and fluids and left behind, like the residue of a
careless pleasure, living material conceived, nourished, shaped within female
bellies. I remembered when he had come to see me in the neighborhood, years
earlier, and we had stayed talking in the courtyard, and Melina had seen him
from the window and had taken him for his father. Donato’s former lover had
caught resemblances that had seemed nonexistent to me. But now it was clear,
she was right and I was wrong. Nino was not fleeing his father out of fear of
becoming like him: Nino already was his father and didn’t want to admit it.
Yet I couldn’t hate him. In the burning-hot train I not only reflected on the
time I had seen him in the bookstore but inserted him into events, words,
remarks of those days. Sex had pursued me, clawed me, foul and attractive,
obsessively present in gestures, in conversations, in books. The dividing walls
were crumbling, the shackles of good manners were breaking. And Nino was
living  that  period  intensely.  He  was  part  of  the  rowdy  gathering  at  the
university, with its intense odor, he was fit for the disorder of Mariarosa’s
house, surely he had been her lover. With his intelligence, with his desires,
with  his  capacity  for  seduction,  he  moved  confident,  curious  within  those
times. Maybe I was wrong to connect him to the obscene desires of his father;
his behavior belonged to another culture, as Silvia and Mariarosa had pointed
out; girls wanted him, he took them, there was no abuse of power, there was no
guilt, only the rights of desire. Who knows, maybe Nino in telling me that Lila
was made badly even when it comes to sex, wished to convey that the time for
pretenses was over, that to load pleasure with responsibility was an error. Even
if he had his father’s nature, surely his passion for women told a different
story.
With astonishment, with disappointment, I arrived in Naples at the moment
when a part of me, at the thought of how much Nino was loved and how much
he loved, had yielded and reached the point of admitting: what’s wrong with it,
he enjoys life with those who know how to enjoy it. And as I was returning to
the neighborhood, I realized that precisely because all women wanted him and
he took them all, I who had wanted him forever wanted him even more. So I
decided that I would at all costs avoid meeting him again. As for Lila, I didn’t
know how to behave. Be silent, tell her everything? Whenever I see her, I
would decide then.
21.
At home I didn’t have, or didn’t want to have, time to go back to the subject.
Pietro  telephoned,  he  said  that  he  was  coming  to  meet  my  parents  the
following week. I accepted it as an inevitable misfortune, I struggled to find a
hotel, clean the house, lessen my family’s anxiety. That last task was in vain,
the situation had grown worse. In the neighborhood the malicious gossip had
increased: about my book, about me, about my constant traveling alone. My
mother had put up a defense by boasting that I was about to get married, but,
to  keep  my  decisions  against  God  from  complicating  things  further,  she
pretended that I was getting married not in Naples but in Genoa. As a result the
gossip increased, which exasperated her.
One night she confronted me harshly, saying that people were reading my
book, were outraged, and talking behind her back. My brothers—she cried—
had had to beat up the butcher’s sons, who had called me a whore, and not
only that: they had punched in the face a classmate of Elisa’s who had asked
her to do nasty things like her older sister.
“What did you write?” she yelled.
“Nothing, Ma.”
“Did you write the disgusting things that you go around doing?”
“What disgusting things. Read it.”
“I can’t waste time with your nonsense.”
“Then leave me alone.”
“If your father finds out what people are saying about you, he’ll throw you
out of the house.”
“He won’t have to, I’ll go myself.”
It was evening, and I went for a walk so as not to reproach her with things I
would later regret. On the street, in the gardens, along the stradone, I had the
impression that people stared at me insistently, spiteful shadows of a world I
no longer inhabited. I ran into Gigliola, who was returning from work. We lived
in the same building, we walked together, but I was afraid that sooner or later
she would find a way of saying something irritating. Instead, to my surprise,
she spoke timidly, she who was always aggressive if not malicious: “I read your
book, it’s wonderful, how brave you were to write those things.”
I stiffened.
“What things?”
“The things you do on the beach.”
“I don’t do them, the character does.”
“Yes, but you wrote them really well, Lenù, just the way it happens, with the
same filthiness. They are secrets that you know only if you’re a woman.” Then
she took me by the arm, made me stop, said softly, “Tell Lina, if you see her,
that she was right, I admit it to her. She was right not to give a shit about her
husband, her mamma, her father, her brother, Marcello, Michele, all that shit. I
should have escaped from here, too, following the example of you two, who are
intelligent. But I was born stupid and I can’t do anything about it.”
We said nothing else important, she stopped on her landing, I went to my
house.  But  those  comments  stayed  with  me.  It  struck  me  that  she  had
arbitrarily  put  together  Lila’s  fall  and  my  rise,  as  if,  compared  with  her
situation, they had the same degree of positivity. But what was most clearly
impressed in my mind was how she had recognized in the filthiness of my
story her own experience of filthiness. It was a new fact, I didn’t know how to
evaluate it. Especially since Pietro arrived and for a while I forgot about it.
22.
I went to meet him at the station, and took him to Via Firenze, where there
was a hotel that my father had recommended and which I had finally decided
on. Pietro seemed even more anxious than my family. He got off the train, as
unkempt as usual, his tired face red in the heat, dragging a large suitcase. He
wanted to buy a bouquet for my mother, and contrary to his habits he was
satisfied only when it seemed to him big enough, expensive enough. At the
hotel he left me in the lobby with the flowers, swearing that he would return
immediately, and reappeared half an hour later in a blue suit, white shirt, blue
tie, and polished shoes. I burst out laughing, he asked: I don’t look good? I
reassured him, he looked very good. But on the street I felt men’s gazes, their
mocking laughter, maybe even more insistent than if I had been alone, as if to
emphasize that my escort did not deserve respect. Pietro, with that big bunch
of flowers that he wouldn’t let me carry, so respectable in every detail, was not
suited to my city. Although he put his free arm around my shoulders, I had the
impression that it was I who had to protect him.
Elisa opened the door, then my father arrived, then my brothers, all in their
best clothes, all too cordial. My mother appeared last, the sound of her crooked
gait could be heard right after that of the toilet flushing. She had set her hair,
she had put a little color on her lips and cheeks, and thought, She was once a
pretty girl. She accepted the flowers with condescension, and we sat in the
dining room, which for the occasion held no trace of the beds we made at night
and unmade in the morning. Everything was tidy, the table had been set with
care.  My  mother  and  Elisa  had  cooked  for  days,  which  made  the  dinner
interminable. Pietro, amazing me, became very expansive. He questioned my
father about his work at the city hall and encouraged him to the point where
he forgot his labored Italian and began to tell in dialect witty stories about his
fellow employees, which my fiancé, although he understood little, appeared to
appreciate tremendously. Above all he ate as I had never seen him eat, and not
only complimented my mother and sister on every course but asked—he, who
was unable even to cook an egg—about the ingredients of every dish as if he
intended to get to the stove right away. He showed such a liking for the potato
gattò that my mother served him a second very generous portion and promised
him, even if in her usual reluctant tone, that she would make it again before he
left. In a short time the atmosphere became friendly. Even Peppe and Gianni
stayed at the table, instead of running out to join their friends.
After  dinner  we  came  to  the  point.  Pietro  turned  serious  and  asked  my
father for my hand. He used just that expression, in a voice full of emotion,
which brought tears to my sister’s eyes and amused my brothers. My father
was embarrassed, he mumbled expressions of friendship for a professor so
clever and serious who was honoring him with that question. And the evening
finally seemed to be reaching its conclusion, when my mother interrupted. She
said darkly:
“Here we don’t approve of your not getting married in church: a marriage
without a priest isn’t a marriage.”
Silence. My parents must have come to a secret agreement that my mother
would take on the job of making this announcement. But my father couldn’t
resist, and immediately gave Pietro a half smile to indicate that, although he
was included in that we invoked by his wife, he was ready to see reason. Pietro
returned the smile, but this time he didn’t consider him a valid interlocutor, he
addressed himself only to my mother. I had told him of my family’s hostility,
and he was prepared. He began with a simple, affectionate, and, according to
his usual habit, very clear speech. He said that he understood, but that he
wished to be, in turn, understood. He said that he had the greatest respect for
all those who sincerely believed in a god, but that he did not feel he could do
so. He said that not being a believer didn’t mean believing in nothing, he had
his convictions and absolute faith in his love for me. He said it was love that
would consolidate our marriage, not an altar, a priest, a city official. He said
that the rejection of a religious service was for him a matter of principle and
that surely I would stop loving him, or certainly I would love him less, if he
proved to be a man without principles. He said finally that surely my mother
herself would refuse to entrust her daughter to a person ready to knock down
even a single one of the pillars on which he had based his existence.
At those words my father made broad nods of assent, my brothers were
openmouthed, Elisa was moved again. But my mother remained impassive. For
some moments she fiddled with her wedding ring, then she looked Pietro in
the eye and instead of going back to the subject to say that she was persuaded,
or to continue to argue, she began to sing my praises with cold determination.
Ever since I was small I had been an unusual child. I had been capable of doing
things that no girl of the neighborhood had been capable of doing. I had been
and was her pride, the pride of the whole family. I had never disappointed her.
I had won the right to be happy and if someone made me suffer she would
make him suffer a thousand times more.
I listened in embarrassment. All the while I tried to understand if she was
speaking seriously or if, as usual, she was intending to explain to Pietro that
she didn’t give a damn about the fact that he was a professor and all his talk, it
wasn’t he who was doing the Grecos a favor but the Grecos who were doing
him one. I couldn’t tell. My fiancé instead believed her absolutely and as my
mother spoke he simply assented. When at last she was silent, he said that he
knew very well how precious I was and that he was grateful to her for having
brought me up as I was. Then he stuck a hand in a pocket of his jacket and took
out a blue case that he gave me with a timid gesture. What is it, I thought, he’s
already given me a ring, is he giving me another? Meanwhile I opened the case.
There was a very beautiful ring, of red gold, and in the setting an amethyst
surrounded  by  diamonds.  Pietro  murmured:  it  was  my  grandmother’s,  my
mother’s mother, and in my family we would all like you to have it.
That gift was the signal that the ritual was over. We began to drink again,
my father went back to telling funny stories of his private and work life, Gianni
asked Pietro what team he rooted for, Peppe challenged him to arm wrestling. I
helped my sister clear the table. In the kitchen I made the mistake of asking my
mother:
“How is he?”
“The ring?”
“Pietro.”
“He’s ugly, he has crooked feet.”
“Papa was no better.”
“What do you have to say against your father?”
“Nothing.”
“Then be quiet, you only know how to be bossy with us.”
“It’s not true.”
“No? Then why do you let him order you? If he has principles, you don’t
have them? Make yourself respected.”
Elisa intervened: “Ma, Pietro is a gentleman and you don’t know what a real
gentleman is.”
“And you do? Be careful, you’re small and if you don’t stay in your place I’ll
hit you. Did you see that hair? A gentleman has hair like that?”
“A gentleman doesn’t have normal handsomeness, Ma, a gentleman you can
tell, he’s a type.”
My mother pretended she was going to hit her and my sister, laughing,
pulled me out of the kitchen, saying cheerfully:
“Lucky you, Lenù. How refined Pietro is, how he loves you. He gave you his
grandmother’s antique ring, will you show it to me?”
We returned to the dining room. All the males of the house now wanted to
arm-wrestle with my fiancé, they were eager to show that they were superior
to the professor at least in tests of strength. He didn’t back off. He removed his
jacket, rolled up his sleeve, sat down at the table. He lost to Peppe, he lost to
Gianni, he lost also to my father. But I was impressed by how seriously he
competed. He turned red, a vein swelled on his forehead, he argued that his
opponents were shamelessly violating the rules of the contest. He held out
stubbornly  against  Peppe  and  Gianni,  who  lifted  weights,  and  against  my
father, who was capable of unscrewing a screw with just his bare hand. All the
while, I was afraid that, in order not to give in, he would break his arm.
23.
Pietro  stayed  for  three  days.  My  father  and  brothers  quickly  became
attached to him. My brothers were pleased that he didn’t give himself airs and
was interested in them even though school had judged them incompetent. My
mother on the other hand continued to treat him in an unfriendly manner and
not until the day before he left did she soften. It was a Sunday, and my father
said he wanted to show his son-in-law how beautiful Naples was. His son-in-
law agreed, and proposed that we should eat out.
“In a restaurant?” my mother asked, scowling.
“Yes, ma’am, we ought to celebrate.”
“Better if I cook, we said we’d make you another gattò.”
“No, thank you, you’ve already done too much.”
While we were getting ready my mother drew me aside and asked: “Will he
pay?”
“Yes.”
“Sure?”
“Sure, Ma, he’s the one who invited us.”
We  went  into  the  city  center  early  in  the  morning,  dressed  in  our  best
clothes. And something happened that first of all amazed me. My father had
taken on the task of tour guide. He showed our guest the Maschio Angioino,
the royal palace, the statues of the kings, Castel dell’Ovo, Via Caracciolo, and
the sea. Pietro listened attentively. But at a certain point he, who was coming
to our city for the first time, began modestly to tell us about it, to make us
discover our city. It was wonderful. I had never had a particular interest in the
background of my childhood and adolescence, I marveled that Pietro could talk
about it with such learned admiration. He showed that he knew the history of
Naples, the literature, fables, legends, anecdotes, the visible monuments and
those  hidden  by  neglect.  I  imagined  that  he  knew  about  the  city  in  part
because  he  was  a  man  who  knew  everything,  and  in  part  because  he  had
studied it thoroughly, with his usual rigor, because it was mine, because my
voice,  my  gestures,  my  whole  body  had  been  subjected  to  its  influence.
Naturally my father soon felt deposed, my brothers were annoyed. I realized it,
I hinted to Pietro to stop. He blushed, and immediately fell silent. But my
mother, with one of her unpredictable twists, hung on his arm and said: “Go
on, I like it, no one ever told me those things.”
We went to eat in a restaurant in Santa Lucia that according to my father (he
had never been there but had heard about it) was very good.
“Can I order what I want?” Elisa whispered in my ear.
“Yes.”
The time flew by pleasantly. My mother drank too much and made some
crude  remarks,  my  father  and  my  brothers  started  joking  again  with  each
other and with Pietro. I didn’t take my eyes off my future husband; I was sure
that I loved him, he was a person who knew his value and yet, if necessary, he
could  forget  himself  with  naturalness.  I  noticed  for  the  first  time  his
propensity  to  listen  and  his  sympathetic  tone  of  voice,  like  that  of  a  lay
confessor, and they pleased me. Maybe I should persuade him to stay another
day and take him to see Lila, tell her: I’m marrying this man, I’m about to leave
Naples with him, what do you say, am I doing well? And I was considering that
possibility when at a nearby table five or six students began to look at us
insistently and laugh. I immediately realized that they found Pietro funny-
looking because of his thick eyebrows, the bushy hair over his forehead. After a
few minutes my brothers, both at the same time, stood up, went over to the
students’ table, and started a quarrel in their usual violent manner. An uproar
arose, shouting, some punches. My mother shrieked insults in support of her
sons,  my  father  and  Pietro  rushed  to  pull  them  away.  Pietro  was  almost
amused; he seemed not to have understood the reason for the fight. Once in
the street he said ironically: Is this a local custom, you suddenly get up and
start hitting the people at the next table? He and my brothers became livelier
and friendlier than before. But as soon as possible my father drew Peppe and
Gianni aside and rebuked them for the bad impression they had made in front
of the professor. I heard Peppe justifying himself almost in a whisper: They
were making fun of Pietro, Papa, what the hell were we supposed to do? I liked
that he said Pietro and not the professor: it meant that Pietro was part of the
family, at home, a friend with the best qualities, and that, even if he was rather
odd-looking, no one could make fun of him in his presence. But the incident
convinced me that it was better not to take Pietro to see Lila: I knew her, she
was mean, she would find him ridiculous and would make fun of him like the
young men in the restaurant.
In the evening, exhausted by the day outside, we ate at home and then we all
went  out  again,  taking  my  future  husband  to  the  hotel.  As  we  parted,  my
mother, in high spirits, unexpectedly kissed him noisily on each cheek. But
when  we  returned  to  the  neighborhood,  saying  a  lot  of  nice  things  about
Pietro, she kept to herself, without saying a word. Before she went to her room
she said to me bitterly: “You are too fortunate—you don’t deserve that poor
boy.”
24.
The book sold well all summer, and I continued to talk about it here and
there  around  the  country.  I  was  careful  now  to  defend  it  with  a  tone  of
detachment, at times chilling the more inquisitive audiences. Every so often I
remembered Gigliola’s words and I mixed them with my own, trying to give
them a place.
In early September, Pietro moved to Florence, to a hotel near the station,
and started looking for an apartment. He found a small place to rent in the
neighborhood of Santa Maria del Carmine, and I went right away to see it. It
was an apartment with two dingy rooms, in terrible condition. The kitchen was
tiny,  the  bathroom  had  no  window.  When  in  the  past  I  had  gone  to  Lila’s
brand-new  apartment  to  study,  she  would  often  let  me  stretch  out  in  her
spotless tub, enjoying the warm water and the dense bubbles. The bathtub in
that apartment in Florence was cracked and yellowish, the type you had to sit
upright in. But I smothered my unhappiness, I said it was all right: Pietro’s
course was starting, he had to work, he couldn’t waste time. And, besides, it
was a palace compared to my parents’ house.
However, just as Pietro was getting ready to sign the lease, Adele arrived.
She didn’t have my timidity. She judged the apartment a hovel, completely
unsuited to two people who were to spend a large part of their time at home
working. So she did what her son hadn’t done and what she, on the other hand,
could do. She picked up the telephone and, paying no attention to Pietro’s
show of opposition, marshaled some Florentine friends, all influential people.
In a short time she had found in San Niccolò, for a laughable rent, because it
was  a  favor,  five  light-filled  rooms,  with  a  large  kitchen  and  an  adequate
bathroom. She wasn’t satisfied with that: she made some improvements at her
own expense, she helped me furnish it. She listed possibilities, gave advice,
guided me. But I often noted that she didn’t trust either my submissiveness or
my taste. If I said yes, she wanted to make sure I really agreed, if I said no she
pressed me until I changed my mind. In general we always did as she said. On
the other hand, I seldom opposed her; I had no trouble going along with her,
and in fact made an effort to learn. I was mesmerized by the rhythm of her
sentences, by her gestures, by her hair style, by her clothes, her shoes, her
pins, her necklaces, her always beautiful earrings. And she liked my attitude of
an attentive student. She persuaded me to cut my hair short, she urged me to
buy clothes of her taste in an expensive shop that offered her big discounts,
she gave me a pair of shoes that she liked and would have bought for herself
but didn’t consider suitable for her age, and she even took me to a friend who
was a dentist.
Meanwhile, because of the apartment that, in Adele’s opinion, constantly
needed some new attention, because of Pietro, who was overwhelmed by work,
the wedding was put off from autumn to spring, something that allowed my
mother to prolong her war to get money from me. I tried to avoid serious
conflicts by demonstrating that I hadn’t forgotten my family. With the arrival
of the telephone, I had the hall and kitchen repainted, I had new wine-colored
flowered wallpaper put in the dining room, I bought a coat for Elisa, I got a
television on the installment plan. And at a certain point I also gave myself
something:  I  enrolled  in  a  driving  school,  passed  the  exam  easily,  got  my
license. But my mother darkened:
“You like throwing away money? What’s the use of a license if you don’t
have a car?”
“We’ll see later.”
“You want to buy a car? How much do you really have saved up?”
“None of your business.”
Pietro had a car, and once we were married I intended to use it. When he
returned to Naples, in the car, in fact, to bring his parents to meet mine, he let
me drive a little, around the old neighborhood and the new one. I drove on the
stradone,  passing  the  elementary  school,  the  library,  I  drove  on  the  streets
where Lila had lived when she was married, I turned back and skirted the
gardens. That experience of driving is the only good thing I can remember.
Otherwise it was a terrible afternoon, followed by an endless dinner. Pietro and
I struggled to make our families less uncomfortable, but they were so many
worlds apart that the silences were extremely long. When the Airotas left,
loaded with an enormous quantity of leftovers pressed on them by my mother,
it suddenly seemed to me that I was wrong about everything. I came from that
family, Pietro from that other, each of us carried our ancestors in our body.
How would our marriage go? What awaited me? Would the affinities prevail
over  the  differences?  Would  I  be  capable  of  writing  another  book?  When?
About what? And would Pietro support me? And Adele? And Mariarosa?
One evening, with thoughts like that in my head, I heard someone call me
from the street. I rushed to the window—I had immediately recognized the
voice of Pasquale Peluso. I saw that he wasn’t alone, he was with Enzo. I was
alarmed. At that hour shouldn’t Enzo be in San Giovanni a Teduccio, at home,
with Lila and Gennaro?
“Can you come down?” Pasquale shouted.
“What’s happening?”
“Lina doesn’t feel well and wants to see you.”
I’m  coming,  I  said,  and  ran  down  the  stairs  although  my  mother  was
shouting after me: Where are you going at this hour, come back here.
25.
I hadn’t seen either Pasquale or Enzo for a long time, but they got right to
the point—they had come for Lila and began talking about her immediately.
Pasquale had grown a Che Guevara-style beard and it seemed to me that it had
improved  him.  His  eyes  seemed  bigger  and  more  intense,  and  the  thick
mustache covered his bad teeth even when he laughed. Enzo, on the other
hand, hadn’t changed, as silent, as compact, as ever. Only when we were in
Pasquale’s old car did I realize how surprising it was to see them together. I
had been sure that no one in the neighborhood wanted to have anything to do
with Lila and Enzo. But it wasn’t so: Pasquale often went to their house, he had
come with Enzo to get me, Lila had sent them together.
It was Enzo who in his dry and orderly way told me what had happened:
Pasquale,  who  was  working  at  a  construction  site  near  San  Giovanni  a
Teduccio, was supposed to stop for dinner at their house. But Lila, who usually
returned from the factory at four-thirty, still hadn’t arrived at seven, when
Enzo and Pasquale got there. The apartment was empty, Gennaro was at the
neighbor’s. The two began cooking, Enzo fed the child. Lila hadn’t shown up
until nine, very pale, very nervous. She hadn’t answered Enzo and Pasquale’s
questions. The only thing she said, in a terrified tone of voice, was: They’re
pulling out my nails. Not true, Enzo had taken her hands and checked, the nails
were in place. Then she got angry and shut herself in her room with Gennaro.
After a while she had yelled at them to find out if I was at home, she wanted to
speak to me urgently.
I asked Enzo:
“Did you have a fight?”
“No.”
“Did she not feel well, was she hurt at work?”
“I don’t think so, I don’t know.”
Pasquale said to me:
“Now, let’s not make ourselves anxious. Let’s bet that as soon as Lina sees
you she’ll calm down. I’m so glad we found you—you’re an important person
now, you must have a lot to do.”
I denied it, but he cited as proof the old article in l’Unità and Enzo nodded in
agreement; he had also read it.
“Lila saw it, too,” he said.
“And what did she say?”
“She was really pleased with the picture.”
“But they made it sound like you were still a student,” Pasquale grumbled.
“You should write a letter to the paper explaining that you’re a graduate.”
He  complained  about  all  the  space  that  even  l’Unità  was  giving  to  the
students. Enzo said he was right, and they held forth with arguments not so
different from those I had heard in Milan, only the vocabulary was cruder. It
was  clear  that  Pasquale  especially  wanted  to  entertain  me  with  arguments
worthy of someone who, though she was their friend, appeared in l’Unità with a
photograph. But maybe they did it to dispel the anxiety, theirs and mine.
I listened. I quickly realized that their relationship had solidified precisely
because of their political passion. They often met after work, at party or some
sort of committee meetings. I listened to them, I joined in out of politeness,
they replied, but meanwhile I couldn’t get Lila out of my mind, Lila consumed
by an unknown anguish, she who was always so resistant. When we reached
San Giovanni they seemed proud of me, Pasquale in particular didn’t miss a
single  word  of  mine,  and  kept  checking  on  me  in  the  rear-view  mirror.
Although he had his usual knowing tone—he was the secretary of the local
section of the Communist Party—he ascribed to my agreement on politics the
power to sanction his position. So that, when he felt clearly supported, he
explained to me, in some distress, that, with Enzo and some others, he was
engaged in a serious fight within the party, which—he said, frowning, pounding
his hands on the wheel—preferred to wait for a whistle from Aldo Moro, like an
obedient dog, rather than stop procrastinating and join the battle.
“What do you think?” he asked.
“It’s as you say,” I said.
“You’re clever,” he praised me then, solemnly, as we were going up the dirty
stairs, “you always were. Right, Enzo?”
Enzo nodded yes, but I understood that his worry about Lila was increasing
at every step, as it was in me, and he felt guilty for being distracted by that
chatter. He opened the door, said aloud, We’re here, and pointed to a door
whose top half was of frosted glass, and through which a faint light shone. I
knocked softly and went in.
26.
Lila was lying on a cot, fully dressed. Gennaro was sleeping next to her.
Come in, she said, I knew you’d come, give me a kiss. I kissed her on the cheeks,
I sat on the empty bed that must be her son’s. How much time had passed since
I’d last seen her? I found her even thinner, even paler, her eyes were red, the
sides  of  her  nose  were  cracked,  her  long  hands  were  scarred  by  cuts.  She
continued almost without a pause, in a low voice so as not to wake the baby: I
saw you in the newspapers, how well you look, your hair is lovely, I know
everything about you, I know you’re getting married, he’s a professor, good for
you, you’re going to live in Florence, I’m sorry I made you come at this hour,
my mind’s no help to me, it’s coming unglued like wallpaper, luckily you’re
here.
“What’s happening?” I asked, and moved to caress her hand.
That  question,  that  gesture  were  enough.  She  opened  her  eyes  wide,
clenched her hand, abruptly pulled it away.
“I’m not well,” she said, “but wait, don’t be scared, I’ll calm down now.”
She became calm. She said softly, enunciating the words: “I’ve disturbed
you, Lenù, because you have to make me a promise, you’re the only person I
trust: if something happens to me, if I end up in the hospital, if they take me to
the insane asylum, if they can’t find me anymore, you have to take Gennaro,
you have to keep him with you, bring him up in your house. Enzo is good, he’s
smart, I trust him, but he can’t give the child the things you can.”
“Why are you talking like that? What’s wrong? If you don’t explain I can’t
understand.”
“First promise.”
“All right.”
She became agitated again, alarming me.
“No, you mustn’t say all right; you must say here, now, that you’ll take the
child. And if you need money, find Nino, tell him he has to help you. But
promise: I will bring up the child.”
I looked at her uncertainly. But I promised. I promised and I sat and listened
to her all night long.
27.
This may be the last time I’ll talk about Lila with a wealth of detail. Later on
she became more evasive, and the material at my disposal was diminished. It’s
the fault of our lives diverging, the fault of distance. And yet even when I lived
in other cities and we almost never met, and she as usual didn’t give me any
news and I made an effort not to ask for it, her shadow goaded me, depressed
me, filled me with pride, deflated me, giving me no rest.
Today, as I’m writing, that goad is even more essential. I wish she were here,
that’s why I’m writing. I want her to erase, add, collaborate in our story by
spilling into it, according to her whim, the things she knows, what she said or
thought: the time she confronted Gino, the fascist; the time she met Nadia,
Professor Galiani’s daughter; the time she returned to the apartment on Corso
Vittorio  Emanuele  where  long  ago  she  had  felt  out  of  place;  the  time  she
looked frankly at her experience of sex. As for my own embarrassments as I
listened, my sufferings, the few things I said during her long story, I’ll think
about them later.
28.
As soon as The Blue Fairy turned to ash in the bonfire of the courtyard, Lila
went back to work. I don’t know how strong an effect our meeting had on her—
certainly she felt unhappy for days but managed not to ask herself why. She
had  learned  that  it  hurt  to  look  for  reasons,  and  she  waited  for  the
unhappiness to become first a general discontent, then a kind of melancholy,
and finally the normal labor of every day: taking care of Gennaro, making the
beds, keeping the house clean, washing and ironing the baby’s clothes, Enzo’s,
and her own, making lunch for the three of them, leaving little Rino at the
neighbor’s with a thousand instructions, hurrying to the factory and enduring
the work and the abuses, coming home to devote herself to her son, and also to
the children Gennaro played with, making dinner, the three of them eating
again, putting Gennaro to bed while Enzo cleared up and washed the dishes,
returning to the kitchen to help him study, something that was very important
to him, and that, despite her weariness, she didn’t want to deny him.
What did she see in Enzo? In essence, I think, the same thing she had wanted
to see in Stefano and in Nino: a way of finally putting everything back on its
feet in the proper way. But while Stefano, once the screen of money vanished,
had turned out to be a person without substance and dangerous; while Nino,
once the screen of intelligence vanished, had been transformed into a black
smoke of pain, Enzo for now seemed incapable of nasty surprises. He was the
boy  whom,  for  obscure  reasons,  she  had  always  respected  in  elementary
school, and now he was a man so deeply compact in every gesture, so resolute
toward the world, and so gentle with her that she could be sure he wouldn’t
abruptly change shape.
Of  course,  they  didn’t  sleep  together.  Lila  couldn’t  do  it.  They  shut
themselves in their rooms, and she heard him moving on the other side of the
wall  until  every  noise  stopped  and  there  remained  only  the  sounds  of  the
apartment, the building, the street. She had trouble falling asleep, in spite of
her  exhaustion.  In  the  dark  all  the  reasons  for  unhappiness  that  she  had
prudently left nameless got mixed up and were concentrated on Gennaro, little
Rino. She thought: What will this child become? She thought: I mustn’t call him
Rinuccio, that would drive him to regress into dialect. She thought: I also have
to help the children he plays with if I don’t want him to be ruined by being
with them. She thought: I don’t have time, I myself am not what I once was, I
never pick up a pen, I no longer read books.
Sometimes she felt a weight on her chest. She became alarmed and turned
on the light in the middle of the night, looked at her sleeping child. She saw
almost nothing of Nino; Gennaro reminded her, rather, of her brother. When
he was younger, the child had followed her around, now instead he was bored,
he yelled, he wanted to run off and play, he said bad words to her. I love him—
Lila reflected—but do I love him just as he is? An ugly question. The more she
observed her son, the more she felt that, even if the neighbor found him very
intelligent, he wasn’t growing up as she would have liked. She felt that the
years she had dedicated to him had been in vain, now it seemed to her wrong
that the quality of a person depends on the quality of his early childhood. You
had to be constant, and Gennaro had no constancy, nor did she. My mind is
always scattering, she said to herself, I’m made badly and he’s made badly.
Then she was ashamed of thinking like that, she whispered to the sleeping
child: you’re clever, you already know how to read, you already know how to
write, you can do addition and subtraction, your mother is stupid, she’s never
satisfied. She kissed the little boy on the forehead and turned out the light.
But still she couldn’t sleep, especially when Enzo came home late and went
to bed without asking her to study. On these occasions, Lila imagined that he
had met some prostitute or had a lover, a colleague in the factory where he
worked, an activist from the Communist cell he had immediately joined. Males
are like that, she thought, at least the ones I’ve known: they have to have sex
constantly, otherwise they’re unhappy. I don’t think Enzo is any different, why
should he be. And besides I’ve rejected him, I’ve left him in the bed by himself,
I can’t make any demands. She was afraid only that he would fall in love and
send her away. She wasn’t worried about finding no roof over her head, she
had a job at the sausage factory and felt strong, surprisingly, much stronger
than when she had married Stefano and found herself with a lot of money but
was subjugated by him. Rather, she was afraid of losing Enzo’s kindness, the
attention he gave to all her anxieties, the tranquil strength he emanated and
thanks  to  which  he  had  saved  her  first  from  Nino’s  absence,  then  from
Stefano’s presence. All the more because, in her present situation, he was the
only  one  who  gave  her  any  gratification,  who  continued  to  ascribe  to  her
extraordinary capabilities.
“You know what that means?”
“No.”
“Look closely.”
“It’s German, Enzo, I don’t know German.”
“But if you concentrate, after a while you’ll know it,” he said to her, partly
joking, partly serious.
Enzo had worked hard to get a diploma and had succeeded, but, even though
she had stopped going to school in fifth grade, he believed that she had a much
brighter intelligence than he did and attributed to her the miraculous quality
of rapidly mastering any material. In fact, when, with very little to go on, he
nevertheless became convinced that the languages of computer programming
held the future of the human race, and that the élite who first mastered them
would have a resounding part in the history of the world, he immediately
turned to her.
“Help me.”
“I’m tired.”
“The life we lead is disgusting, Lina, we have to change.”
“For me it’s fine like this.”
“The child is with strangers all day.”
“He’s big, he can’t live in a bell jar.”
“Look what bad shape your hands are in.”
“They’re my hands and I’ll do as I like with them.”
“I want to earn more, for you and for Gennaro.”
“You take care of your things and I’ll take care of mine.”
Harsh reactions, as usual. Enzo enrolled in a correspondence course—it was
expensive,  requiring  periodic  tests  to  be  sent  to  an  international  data
processing center with headquarters in Zurich, which returned them corrected
—and gradually he had involved Lila and she had tried to keep up. But she
behaved in a completely different way than she had with Nino, whom she had
assailed with her obsession to prove that she could help him in everything.
When she studied with Enzo she was calm, she didn’t try to overpower him.
The evening hours that they spent on the course were a struggle for him, for
her  a  sedative.  Maybe  that  was  why,  the  rare  times  he  returned  late  and
seemed able to do without her, Lila remained wakeful, anxious, as she listened
to the water running in the bathroom, with which she imagined Enzo washing
off his body every trace of contact with his lovers.
29.
In the factory—she had immediately understood—overwork drove people to
want to have sex not with their wife or husband in their own house, where
they returned exhausted and empty of desire, but there, at work, morning or
afternoon.  The  men  reached  out  their  hands  at  every  opportunity,  they
propositioned you if they merely passed by; and women, especially the ones
who were not so young, laughed, rubbed against them with their big bosoms,
fell  in  love,  and  love  became  a  diversion  that  mitigated  the  labor  and  the
boredom, giving an impression of real life.
From Lila’s first days the men had tried to get close, as if to sniff her. Lila
repulsed them, and they laughed or went off humming songs full of obscene
allusions. One morning, to make things perfectly clear, she almost pulled off
the ear of a man who passing by had made a lewd remark and pressed a kiss on
her neck. He was a fairly attractive man in his forties, named Edo, who spoke to
everyone in an allusive way and was good at telling dirty jokes. Lila grabbed
the ear with one hand and twisted it, pulling with all her strength, her nails
digging into the membrane, without letting go her grip even though the man
was yelling, as he tried to parry the kicks she was giving him. After which,
furious, she went to see Bruno Soccavo to protest.
Lila had seen him only a few times since he hired her––fleetingly, without
paying him much attention. In that situation, however, she was able to observe
him closely. He was standing behind the desk; he had risen deliberately, the
way men do when a woman enters the room. Lila was amazed: Soccavo’s face
was bloated, his eyes shrouded by dissipation, his chest heavy, and his flushed
complexion clashed like magma against his black hair and the white of his
wolfish teeth. She wondered: what does this man have to do with the young
man, the friend of Nino who was studying law? And she felt there was no
continuity between the time on Ischia and the sausage factory: between them
stretched a void, and in the leap from one space to the other Bruno—maybe
because his father had been ill recently and the weight of the business (the
debts, some said) had fallen suddenly on his shoulders—had changed for the
worse.
She told him her complaints, he began to laugh.
“Lina,” he warned her, “I did you a favor, but don’t make trouble for me. We
all work hard here, don’t always have your gun aimed: people have to relax
every so often, otherwise it causes problems for me.”
“The rest of you can relax with each other.”
He ran his eyes over her with a look of amusement.
“I thought you liked to joke.”
“I like it when I decide.”
Lila’s hard tone made him change his. He became serious, he said without
looking at her: you’re the same as ever—so beautiful in Ischia. Then he pointed
to the door: go to work, go on.
But from then on, when he met her in the factory, he never failed to speak to
her in front of everyone, and he always gave her a good-humored compliment.
That familiarity in the end sanctioned Lila’s situation in the factory: she was in
the good graces of the young Soccavo, and so it was as well to leave her alone.
This seemed to be confirmed when one afternoon, right after the lunch break,
a large woman named Teresa stopped her and said teasingly: you’re wanted in
the  seasoning  room.  Lila  went  into  the  big  room  where  the  salamis  were
drying, a rectangular space crammed with salamis hanging from the ceiling in
the  yellow  light.  There  she  found  Bruno,  who  appeared  to  be  doing  an
inspection but in reality wanted to chat.
While he wandered around the room poking and sniffing with the air of an
expert,  he  asked  her  about  Pinuccia,  her  sister-in-law,  and—a  thing  that
irritated  Lila—said,  without  looking  at  her,  in  fact  as  he  examined  a
soppressata: she was never happy with your brother, she fell in love with me
that summer, like you and Nino. Then he passed by and, with his back to her,
added: it was thanks to her that I discovered that pregnant women love to
make love. Then, without giving her the time to comment or make a sarcastic
remark or get angry, he stopped in the middle of the room and said that while
the place as a whole had nauseated him ever since he was a child, here in the
drying room he had always felt comfortable, there was something satisfying,
solid, the product that was nearly finished, acquiring refinement, spreading its
odor, being readied for the market. Look, touch it, he said to her, it’s compact,
hard, smell the fragrance it gives off: it’s like the odor of man and woman when
they  embrace  and  touch—you  like  it?—if  you  knew  how  many  girls  I’ve
brought here since I was a boy. And just then he grabbed her by the waist, slid
his lips down her long neck, as he squeezed her bottom—he seemed to have a
hundred hands, he was rubbing her on top of the apron, underneath it, at a
frenetic  and  breathless  speed,  in  an  exploration  without  pleasure,  a  pure
intrusive desire.
For  Lila  everything,  except  the  smell  of  the  salamis,  reminded  her  of
Stefano’s violence and for several seconds she felt annihilated, she was afraid
of being murdered. Then fury seized her, and she hit Bruno in the face and
between the legs, she yelled him, you are a shit of a man, you’ve got nothing
down there; come here, pull it out so I can cut it off, you shit.
Bruno let go, retreated. He touched his lip, which was bleeding, he snickered
in embarrassment, he mumbled: I’m sorry, I thought there might be at least a
little gratitude. Lila shouted at him: You mean I have to pay a penalty, or you’ll
fire me, is that it? He laughed again, shook his head: No, if you don’t want to
you don’t want to, that’s all, I apologized, what else should I do? But she was
beside herself, only now did she begin to feel on her body the traces of his
hands, and she knew it would last, it wasn’t something she could wash off with
soap. She backed up toward the door, she said to him: You were lucky right
now, but whether you fire me or not, I swear I’ll make you curse the moment
you touched me. As she was leaving he muttered: What did I do to you, I didn’t
do anything, come here, as if these were real problems, let’s make peace.
She went back to her job. At the time she was working in the steamy vat
room, as a kind of attendant who among other things was supposed to keep the
floor dry, a fruitless task. Edo, the one whose ear she had almost torn off,
looked at her with curiosity. All of them, men and women, kept their eyes on
her as she returned, enraged, from the drying room. Lila didn’t exchange a
glance with anyone. She grabbed a rag, slammed it down on the bricks, and
began to wipe the floor, which was a swamp, uttering aloud, in a threatening
tone:  Let’s  see  if  some  other  son  of  a  bitch  wants  to  try.  Her  companions
concentrated on their work.
For days she expected to be fired, but she wasn’t. If she happened to run into
Bruno, he smiled kindly, she responded with a cold nod. No consequences,
then, except disgust at those short hands, and flashes of hatred. But since Lila
continued  to  show  the  same  contemptuous  indifference  toward  the
supervisors, they suddenly began to torment her again, by constantly changing
her job, forcing her to work until she was worn out, making obscene remarks.
A sign that they had been given permission.
She didn’t tell Enzo anything about almost tearing off the ear, about Bruno’s
attack, about the everyday harassments and struggles. If he asked her how
things were going at the sausage factory, she answered sarcastically: Why don’t
you tell me how it is where you work? And since he was silent, Lila teased him
a little and then together they turned to the exercises for the correspondence
course. They took refuge there for many reasons, the most important being to
avoid questions about the future: what were they to each other, why was he
taking care of her and Gennaro, why did she accept it, why had they been
living together for so long while Enzo waited in vain every night for her to join
him, tossing and turning in the bed, going to the kitchen with the excuse of
getting a drink of water, glancing at the door with the frosted glass to see if she
had turned off the light yet and to look at her shadow. Mute tensions—I knock,
I let him enter—his doubts, hers. In the end they preferred to dull their senses
by competing with block diagrams as if they were equipment for gymnastics.
“Let’s do the diagram of the door opening,” Lila said.
“Let’s do the diagram of knotting the tie,” Enzo said.
“Let’s do the diagram of tying Gennaro’s shoes,” Lila said.
“Let’s do the diagram of making coffee in the napoletana,” Enzo said.
From the simplest actions to the most complicated, they racked their brains
to diagram daily life, even if the Zurich tests didn’t require it. And not because
Enzo wanted to but because, as usual, Lila, who had begun diffidently, grew
more and more excited each day, and now, in spite of the cold at night, she was
frantic to reduce the entire wretched world they lived in to the truth of 0s and
1s. She seemed to aspire to an abstract linearity—the abstraction that bred all
abstractions—hoping that it would assure her a restful tidiness.
“Let’s diagram the factory,” she proposed one evening.
“The whole process?” he asked, bewildered.
“Yes.”
He looked at her, he said: “All right, let’s start with your job.”
An irritated scowl crossed her face; she said good night and went to her
room.
30.
That equilibrium, already precarious, changed when Pasquale reappeared.
He  was  working  at  a  construction  site  in  the  area  and  had  come  to  San
Giovanni a Teduccio for a meeting of the local section of the Communist Party.
He and Enzo met on the street, by chance, and immediately regained their old
intimacy.  They  ended  up  talking  about  politics,  and  manifested  the  same
dissatisfaction.  Enzo  expressed  himself  cautiously  at  first,  but  Pasquale,
surprisingly, although he had an important local post—secretary of the section
—proved to be anything but cautious, and he criticized the party, which was
revisionist, and the union, which too often closed both eyes. The two spent so
long talking that Lila found Pasquale in the house at dinnertime and had to
feed him as well.
The evening began badly. She felt herself observed, and had to make an
effort not to get angry. What did Pasquale want, to spy on her, report to the
neighborhood how she was living? What right did he have to come there to
judge her? He didn’t speak a single friendly word, he brought no news of her
family—of Nunzia, of her brother Rino, of Fernando. Instead he gave her male
looks, the kind she got in the factory, appraising, and if she became aware of
them he turned his eyes elsewhere. He must have found that she had grown
ugly. Surely he was thinking, How could I, as a boy, have fallen in love with this
woman, I was a fool. And without a doubt he considered her a terrible mother,
since she could have brought up her son in the comfort of the Carracci grocery
stores and instead she had dragged him into that poverty. At a certain point
Lila said huffily to Enzo, you clean up, I’m going to bed. But Pasquale, to her
surprise, assumed a grandiose tone and said to her, with some emotion: Lina,
before you go I have to tell you one thing. There is no woman like you, you
throw yourself into life with a force that, if we all had it, the world would have
changed a long time ago. Then, having broken the ice in this way, he told her
that Fernando had gone back to resoling shoes, that Rino had become Stefano’s
cross to bear, and was constantly begging him for money, that Nunzia he rarely
saw, she never left the house. But you did well, he repeated: no one in the
neighborhood has kicked the Carraccis and the Solaras in the face as much as
you, and I’m on your side.
After that he showed up often, which cut into their studying. He would
arrive at dinnertime with four hot pizzas, playing his usual role of someone
who knows all about how the capitalist and anti-capitalist world functions, and
the old friendship grew stronger. It was clear that he lived without emotional
ties; his sister Carmen was engaged and had little time for him. But he reacted
to  his  solitude  with  an  angry  activism  that  Lila  liked,  that  interested  her.
Although crushed by hard labor at the construction sites, he was involved in
union activities: he threw blood-red paint at the American consulate, if there
were  fascists  to  be  beaten  up  he  was  always  on  the  front  lines,  he  was  a
member of a worker-student committee where he continuously quarreled with
the  students.  Not  to  mention  the  Communist  Party:  because  of  his  critical
position he expected at any moment to lose his post as secretary of the section.
With Enzo and Lila he spoke freely, mixing personal resentments and political
arguments. They tell me I’m an enemy of the party, he complained, they tell me
I make too much of a fuss, I should calm down. But they are the ones who are
destroying the party, they are the ones turning it into a cog in the system, they
are the ones who’ve reduced anti-fascism to democratic oversight. But do you
know  who’s  been  installed  as  the  head  of  the  neighborhood  fascists?  The
pharmacist’s son, Gino, an idiot slave of Michele Solara. And must I put up with
the fact that the fascists are raising their heads again in my neighborhood? My
father—he said, with emotion—gave his entire self to the party, and why: for
this watered-down anti-fascism, for this shit we have today? When that poor
man ended up in jail, innocent, completely innocent, he got angry—he didn’t
murder Don Achille—the party abandoned him, even though he had been a
loyal comrade, even though he had taken part in the Four Days of Naples, and
fought  at  the  Ponte  della  Sanità,  even  though  after  the  war,  in  the
neighborhood, he had been more exposed than anyone else. And Giuseppina,
his mother? Had anyone helped her? As soon as he mentioned his mother,
Pasquale picked up Gennaro and sat him on his lap, saying: See how pretty
your mamma is, do you love her?
Lila listened. At times it occurred to her that she should have said yes to that
youth,  the  first  who  had  noticed  her,  rather  than  aiming  Stefano  and  his
money, rather than getting herself in trouble with Nino: stayed in her place,
not committed the sin of pride, pacified her mind. But at other times, because
of Pasquale’s tirades, she felt gripped again by her childhood, by the ferocity of
the neighborhood, by Don Achille, by his murder, which she, as a child, had
recounted so often and with so many invented details that now it seemed to
her that she had been present. So she remembered the arrest of Pasquale’s
father, and how much the carpenter had shouted, and his wife, and Carmen,
and she didn’t like that, true memories mingled with false ones, she saw the
violence, the blood. Then she roused herself, uneasily, escaped from the flood
of Pasquale’s bitterness, and to soothe herself she urged him to recall, I don’t
know, Christmas and Easter in his family, his mother Giuseppina’s cooking. He
quickly realized what was going on and maybe he thought that Lila missed the
affections of her family, as he missed his. The fact is that one day he showed up
without warning and said gaily: Look who I brought you. He had brought her
Nunzia.
Mother  and  daughter  embraced,  Nunzia  cried  for  a  long  time,  and  gave
Gennaro  a  Pinocchio  ragdoll.  But  as  soon  as  she  started  to  criticize  her
daughter’s decisions, Lila, who at first had appeared happy to see her, said: Ma,
either we act as if nothing happened or it’s better that you go. Nunzia was
offended, she played with the child, and kept saying, as if she really were
talking to the boy: If your mamma goes to work, what about you, poor thing,
where  does  she  leave  you?  At  that  point  Pasquale  realized  he  had  made  a
mistake, he said it was late and they had to go. Nunzia got up and spoke to her
daughter, partly threatening her, partly entreating her. You, she complained.
First you had us living the life of rich people and then you ruined us: your
brother felt abandoned and doesn’t want to see you anymore, your father has
effaced you; Lina, please, I’m not telling you to make peace with your husband,
that’s not possible, but at least clear things up with the Solaras; they’ve taken
everything because of you, and Rino, your father, we Cerullos, now once again
we’re nothing.
Lila listened and then she practically pushed her out, saying: Ma, it’s better if
you don’t come back. She shouted the same thing to Pasquale as well.
31.
Too many problems at once: the feelings of guilt toward Gennaro, toward
Enzo; the cruel shifts at work, the overtime, Bruno’s obscenities; her family,
who wanted to return to burden her; and that presence of Pasquale, toward
whom it was pointless to be aloof. He never got angry; he burst in cheerfully,
sometimes  dragging  Lila,  Gennaro,  and  Enzo  out  to  a  pizzeria,  sometimes
driving them in the car to Agerola so the child could have some fresh air. But
mostly he tried to involve her in his activities. He pushed her to join the union,
even though she didn’t want to and did it only to slight Soccavo, who wouldn’t
like  it.  He  brought  her  pamphlets  of  various  kinds,  very  clear,  concise,  on
subjects  like  the  pay  package,  collective  bargaining,  wage  differentials,
knowing that even if he hadn’t opened them Lila would sooner or later read
them.  He  took  her  with  Enzo  and  the  child  to  Riviera  di  Chiaia,  to  a
demonstration  for  peace  in  Vietnam  that  turned  into  a  general  stampede:
rocks flying, fascists stirring things up, police charging, Pasquale punching,
Lila shouting insults, and Enzo cursing the moment they had decided to take
Gennaro into the middle of that fracas.
But  there  were  two  episodes  in  particular,  in  that  period,  that  were
significant for Lila. Once Pasquale insisted that she come to hear an important
comrade, a woman. Lila accepted the invitation; she was curious. But she heard
almost none of the speech—a speech more or less about the party and the
working  class—because  the  important  comrade  arrived  late  and  when  the
meeting finally began Gennaro was fidgety, and she had to amuse him, taking
him out to the street to play, bringing him back inside, taking him out again.
Yet the little she heard was enough for her to understand how much dignity
the woman had, and how distinct she was in every way from the working-and
lower-middle-class audience. So when she noticed that Pasquale, Enzo, and
some others weren’t satisfied with what the speaker was saying, she thought
that they were unfair, that they should be grateful to that educated woman
who had come to waste her time with them. And when Pasquale made a speech
so argumentative that the comrade delegate lost her temper and, her voice
cracking, exclaimed, in irritation, That’s enough, I’m going to get up and leave,
that reaction pleased her, she took her side. But evidently her feelings were, as
usual, muddled. When Enzo shouted, in support of Pasquale: Comrade, without
us you don’t even exist, so you stay as long as we want you to, and go only
when  we  tell  you,  she  changed  her  mind,  with  sudden  sympathy  for  the
violence of that we—it seemed to her that the woman deserved it. She went
home angry at the child, who had ruined the evening for her.
Much more lively was a meeting of the committee that Pasquale, with his
thirst for engagement, had joined. Lila went not only because it meant a lot to
him but because it seemed to her that the restlessness that drove him to try
and to understand was good. The committee met in Naples, in an old house on
Via dei Tribunali. They arrived one night in Pasquale’s car, and climbed up
crumbling, monumental stairs. The place was large, and there weren’t many
people present. Lila noticed how easy it was to distinguish the faces of the
students  from  those  of  the  workers,  the  fluency  of  the  leaders  from  the
stuttering of the followers. And she quickly became irritated. The students
made speeches that seemed to her hypocritical; they had a modest manner
that clashed with their pedantic phrases. The refrain, besides, was always the
same: We’re here to learn from you, meaning from the workers, but in reality
they were showing off ideas that were almost too obvious about capital, about
exploitation, about the betrayal of social democracy, about the modalities of
the  class  struggle.  Furthermore—she  discovered—the  few  girls,  who  were
mostly silent, flirted eagerly with Enzo and Pasquale. Especially Pasquale, who
was  the  more  sociable,  and  was  treated  with  great  friendliness.  He  was  a
worker who—although he carried a Communist Party card, and was the head of
a  section—had  chosen  to  bring  his  experience  of  the  proletariat  into  a
revolutionary meeting. When he and Enzo spoke, the students, who among
themselves did nothing but quarrel, always registered approval. Enzo as usual
said only a few, loaded words. Pasquale, on the other hand, recounted, with an
inexhaustible  patter,  half  in  Italian,  half  in  dialect,  the  progress  that  the
political work was making at the construction sites around Naples, hurling
small polemical darts at the students, who hadn’t been very active. At the
conclusion, without warning, he dragged her, Lila, into it. He introduced her by
her name and last name, he called her a worker comrade who had a job in a
small food factory, and he heaped praises on her.
Lila  furrowed  her  brow  and  narrowed  her  eyes:  she  didn’t  like  them  all
looking at her like a rare animal. And when, after Pasquale, a girl spoke—the
first of the girls to speak—she became even more annoyed, first of all because
the girl expressed herself like a book, second because she kept referring to her,
calling her Comrade Cerullo, and, third, because Lila already knew her: it was
Nadia,  the  daughter  of  Professor  Galiani,  Nino’s  little  girlfriend,  who  had
written him love letters on Ischia.
For a moment she was afraid that Nadia had in turn recognized her, but
although the girl addressed her as she spoke, she gave no sign of remembering
her. Besides, why should she? Who could say how many rich people’s parties
she had gone to and what crowd of shadows inhabited her memory? For Lila,
on  the  other  hand,  there  had  been  that  one  long-ago  occasion,  and  she
remained struck by it. She recalled the apartment on Corso Vittorio Emanuele
precisely, along with Nino and all those young people from good families, the
books, the paintings, and her own agonizing experience of it, the unease it had
inspired. She couldn’t bear it, she got up while Nadia was still speaking and
went out with Gennaro, carrying inside her an evil energy that, finding no
precise outlet, writhed in her stomach.
After a while, however, she returned; she had decided to have her say, in
order  not  to  feel  inferior.  A  curly-headed  youth  was  speaking  with  great
expertise  about  Italsider  and  piecework.  Lila  waited  for  him  to  finish  and,
ignoring Enzo’s look of bewilderment, asked to speak. She spoke for a long
time, in Italian, with Gennaro fussing in her arms. She began slowly, then she
continued on amid a general silence, perhaps her voice was too loud. She said
jokingly that she knew nothing about the working class. She said she knew
only the workers, men and women, in the factory where she worked, people
from whom there was absolutely nothing to learn except wretchedness. Can
you imagine, she asked, what it means to spend eight hours a day standing up
to your waist in the mortadella cooking water? Can you imagine what it means
to have your fingers covered with cuts from slicing the meat off animal bones?
Can  you  imagine  what  it  means  to  go  in  and  out  of  refrigerated  rooms  at
twenty degrees below zero, and get ten lire more an hour—ten lire—for cold
compensation? If you imagine this, what do you think you can learn from
people who are forced to live like that? The women have to let their asses be
groped by supervisors and colleagues without saying a word. If the owner feels
the need, someone has to follow him into the seasoning room; his father used
to ask for the same thing, maybe also his grandfather; and there, before he
jumps all over you, that same owner makes you a tired little speech on how the
odor  of  salami  excites  him.  Men  and  women  both  are  subjected  to  body
searches, because at the exit there’s something called the “partial,” and if the
red light goes on instead of the green, it means that you’re stealing salamis or
mortadellas.  The  “partial”  is  controlled  by  the  guard,  who’s  a  spy  for  the
owner, and turns on the red light not only for possible thieves but especially
for shy pretty girls and for troublemakers. That is the situation in the factory
where I work. The union has never gone in and the workers are nothing but
poor victims of blackmail, dependent on the law of the owner, that is: I pay you
and so I possess you and I possess your life, your family, and everything that
surrounds you, and if you don’t do as I say I’ll ruin you.
At first no one breathed. Then other speakers followed, who all quoted Lila
devotedly.  At  the  end  Nadia  came  to  give  her  a  hug.  She  was  full  of
compliments, How pretty you are, how clever, you speak so well. She thanked
her, and said seriously: You’ve made us understand how much work we still
have to do. But in spite of her lofty, almost solemn tone, to Lila she seemed
more childish than she remembered when, that night years earlier, she had
seen her with Nino. What did they do, she and the son of Sarratore, did they
dance, did they talk, did they stroke each other, did they kiss? She no longer
knew. Certainly, the girl had a loveliness that was unforgettable. And now Lila
thought, seeing Nadia right before her, she seemed even purer than she had
then, pure and fragile and so genuinely open to the suffering of others that she
appeared to feel their torments in her own body to an unendurable extent.
“Will you come back?”
“I have the child.”
“You have to come back, we need you.”
But Lila shook her head uneasily, she repeated to Nadia: I have the child, and
pointed to him, and to Gennaro she said, Say hello to the lady, tell her you
know  how  to  read  and  write,  let  her  hear  how  well  you  speak.  And  since
Gennaro hid his face against her neck while Nadia smiled vaguely but didn’t
seem to notice him, she said again to her: I have the child, I work eight hours a
day not counting overtime, people in my situation want only to sleep at night.
She left in a daze, with the impression of having exposed herself too fully to
people who, yes, were good-hearted but who, even if they understood it in the
abstract, in the concrete couldn’t understand a thing. I know—it stayed in her
head  without  becoming  sound—I  know  what  a  comfortable  life  full  of  good
intentions means, you can’t even imagine what real misery is.
Once she was on the street her uneasiness increased. As they went toward
the car, she felt that Pasquale and Enzo were sulking, she guessed that her
speech had wounded them. Pasquale took her gently by the arm, closing a
physical gap that before that moment he had never tried to close, and asked
her:
“You really work in those conditions?”
She, irritated by the contact, pulled her arm away, protesting: “And how do
you work, the two of you, how do you work?”
They didn’t answer. They worked hard, that was obvious. And at least Enzo
in front of him, in the factory, women worn out by the work, by humiliations,
by domestic obligations no less than Lila was. Yet now they were both angry
because of the conditions she worked in; they couldn’t tolerate it. You had to
hide  everything  from  men.  They  preferred  not  to  know,  they  preferred  to
pretend  that  what  happened  at  the  hands  of  the  boss  miraculously  didn’t
happen to the women important to them and that—this was the idea they had
grown up with—they had to protect her even at the risk of being killed. In the
face of that silence Lila got even angrier. “Fuck off,” she said, “you and the
working class.”
They  got  in  the  car,  exchanging  only  trite  remarks  all  the  way  to  San
Giovanni a Teduccio. But when Pasquale left them at their house he said to her
seriously: There’s nothing to do, you’re always the best, and then he left again
for  the  neighborhood.  Enzo,  instead,  with  the  child  asleep  in  his  arms,
muttered darkly:
“Why didn’t you say anything? People in the factory put their hands on
you?”
They were tired, she decided to soothe him. She said:
“With me they don’t dare.”
32.
A few days later the trouble began. Lila arrived at work early in the morning,
worn out by her innumerable tasks and completely unprepared for what was
about to happen. It was very cold, she’d had a cough for days, it felt like flu
coming on. At the entrance she saw a couple of kids, they must have decided to
skip school. One of them greeted her with some familiarity and gave her not a
flyer  as  sometimes  happened  but  a  pamphlet  several  pages  long.  She
responded to his greeting but she was bewildered; she had seen the boy at the
committee meeting on Via dei Tribunali. Then she put the pamphlet in her
coat pocket and passed Filippo, the guard, without deigning to look at him, so
he shouted after her: Not even a good morning, eh.
She worked extremely hard as usual—at that time she was in the gutting
section—and forgot about the boy. At lunchtime she went into the courtyard
with her lunchbox to find a sunny corner, but as soon as Filippo saw her he left
the guard booth and joined her. He was a man of about fifty, short, heavy, full
of the most disgusting obscenities but also inclined to a sticky sentimentality.
He had recently had his sixth child, and he easily became emotional, pulling
out his wallet to show off a picture of the baby. Lila thought he had decided to
show it to her as well, but no. The man pulled the pamphlet out of his jacket
pocket and said to her in an extremely aggressive tone:
“Cerù, listen carefully to what I’m telling you: if you said to these shits the
things that are written here, you’ve got yourself in deep trouble, you know?”
She answered coldly:
“I don’t know what the fuck you’re talking about, let me eat.”
Filippo, angrily throwing the pamphlet in her face, snapped:
“You don’t know, eh? Read it, then. We were all happy and in harmony here,
and only a whore like you could spread these things. I turn on the ‘partial’ as I
please? I put my hands on the girls? I, the father of a family? Look out, or don
Bruno will make you pay, and dearly, or by God I’ll smash your face myself.”
He turned and went back to the guard booth.
Lila calmly finished eating, then she picked up the pamphlet. The title was
pretentious: “Investigation Into the Condition of Workers in Naples and the
Provinces.”  She  scanned  the  pages,  and  found  one  devoted  entirely  to  the
Soccavo sausage factory. She read word for word everything that had come out
of her mouth at the meeting on Via dei Tribunali.
She pretended it was nothing. She left the pamphlet on the ground, she
went inside without even looking at the guard booth and returned to work. But
she was furious with whoever had gotten her into that mess, and without even
warning her, especially saintly Nadia. Surely she had written that stuff, it was
all tidily in order and full of maudlin emotion. As she worked the knife on the
cold meat and the odor made her sick and her rage increased, she felt around
her the hostility of the other workers, male and female. They had all known
one another a long time, they knew they were complicit victims, and they had
no doubt about who the whistleblower was: she, the only one who behaved
from the start as if the need to work didn’t go hand in hand with the need to be
humiliated.
In the afternoon Bruno appeared and soon afterward he sent for her. His
face was redder than usual, and he had the pamphlet in his hand.
“Was it you?”
“No.”
“Tell  me  the  truth,  Lina:  there  are  already  too  many  people  out  there
making trouble, you’ve joined them?”
“I told you no.”
“No,  eh?  There  is  no  one  here,  however,  who  has  the  ability  and  the
impudence to make up all these lies.”
“It must have been one of the office workers.”
“The office workers least of all.”
“Then what do you want from me, little birds sing, get mad at them.”
He snorted, he seemed truly strained. He said:
“I gave you a job. I said nothing when you joined the union, my father would
have kicked you out. All right, I did something foolish, there in the drying
room, but I apologized, you can’t say I persecuted you. And you, what do you
do, you take revenge by casting a bad light on my factory and setting it down
in black and white that I take my women workers into the drying room? For
chrissake, when? Me, the workers, are you mad? You’re making me regret the
favor I did you.”
“The favor? I work hard and you pay me a few cents. It’s more the favor I do
you than what you do for me.”
“You see? You talk like those shits. Have the courage to admit that you
wrote this crap.”
“I didn’t write anything.”
Bruno twisted his mouth, he looked at the pages in front of him, and she
understood that he was hesitating, he couldn’t make up his mind: move to a
harsher tone, threaten her, fire her, retreat and try to find out if there were
other initiatives like that being prepared? She made up her mind, and said in a
low voice—reluctantly but with a small charming expression that clashed with
the memory of his violence, still vivid in her body—three conciliatory phrases:
“Trust me, I have a small child, I honestly didn’t do this thing.”
He nodded yes, but he also muttered, unhappily: “You know what you’re
forcing me to do?”
“No, and I don’t want to know.”
“I’ll tell you just the same. If those are your friends, warn them: as soon as
they come back and make a scene out front here, I’ll have them beaten to a
pulp. As for you, be careful: stretch the cord too far and it will snap.”
But the day didn’t end there. On the way out, when Lila passed, the red light
of the partial went on. It was the usual ritual: every day the guard cheerfully
chose three or four victims, the shy girls, eyes lowered, let him feel them up,
the savvy older women laughed, saying: Filì, if you have to touch go on, but
hurry up, I’ve got to go make dinner. This time, Filippo stopped only Lila. It
was cold, a strong wind was blowing. The guard came out of his booth. Lila
shivered, she said: “If you so much as brush me, by God I’ll murder you or have
you murdered.”
Filippo, grim, pointed to a small café table that was always next to the booth.
“Empty your pockets one at a time, put the stuff there.”
Lila found a fresh sausage in her coat, with disgust she felt the soft meat
inside the casing. She pulled it out and burst into laughter, saying, “What shits
you people are, all of you.”
33.
Threats  to  report  her  for  theft.  Deductions  from  her  salary,  fines.  And
insults, Filippo’s hurled at her, and hers at Filippo. Bruno didn’t appear, and
yet he was surely still in the factory, his car was in the courtyard. Lila guessed
that from then on things would get even worse for her.
She went home wearier than usual; she got angry at Gennaro, who wanted to
stay at the neighbor’s; she made dinner. She told Enzo that he would have to
study on his own and she went to bed early. Since she couldn’t get warm under
the covers, she got up and put on a wool sweater over her nightgown. She was
getting back in bed when suddenly, for no obvious reason, her heart was in her
throat and began pounding so hard that it seemed like someone else’s.
She already knew those symptoms, they went along with the thing that later
—eleven years later, in 1980—she called dissolving boundaries. But the signs
had never manifested themselves so violently, and this was the first time it had
happened when she was alone, without people around who for one reason or
another set off that effect. Then she realized with a jolt of horror that she
wasn’t  alone.  From  her  unstuck  head  figures  and  voices  of  the  day  were
emerging, floating through the room: the two boys from the committee, the
guard, her fellow-workers, Bruno in the drying room, Nadia—all moving too
rapidly, as in a silent film. Even the flashes of red light from the partial came at
very narrow intervals, and Filippo who was tearing the sausage out of her
hands and yelling threats. All a trick of the mind: except for Gennaro, in the cot
beside her, with his regular breathing, there were no real persons or sounds in
the  room.  But  that  didn’t  soothe  her,  in  fact  it  magnified  the  fear.  Her
heartbeats were now so powerful that they seemed capable of exploding the
interlocking solidity of objects. The tenacity of the grip that held the walls of
the  room  together  had  weakened,  the  violent  knocking  in  her  throat  was
shaking the bed, cracking the plaster, unsoldering the upper part of her skull,
maybe  it  would  shatter  the  child,  yes,  it  would  shatter  him  like  a  plastic
puppet, splitting open his chest and stomach and head to reveal his insides. I
have to get him away, she thought; the closer he is to me, the more likely he’ll
break. But she remembered another baby that she had pushed out, the baby
that had never taken shape in her womb, Stefano’s child. I pushed him out, or
at least that’s what Pinuccia and Gigliola said behind my back. And maybe I
really did, I expelled him deliberately. Why hasn’t anything, so far, really gone
well  for  me?  And  why  should  I  keep  the  things  that  haven’t  worked?  The
beating showed no sign of diminishing, the figures of smoke pursued her with
the sound of their voices, she got out of the bed again, and sat on the edge. She
was soaked with a sticky sweat, it felt like frozen oil. She placed her bare feet
against Gennaro’s bed, pushed it gently, to move it away but not too far: if she
kept him next to her she was afraid of breaking him, if she pushed him too far
away she was afraid of losing him. She went into the kitchen, taking small
steps and leaning on the furniture, the walls, but repeatedly looking behind
her out of fear that the floor would cave in and swallow up Gennaro. She drank
from the faucet, washed her face, and suddenly her heart stopped, throwing
her forward as if it had braked abruptly.
Over.  Objects  were  sticking  together  again,  her  body  slowly  settled,  the
sweat dried. Lila was trembling now, and so tired that the walls were spinning
around her, she was afraid she would faint. I have to go to Enzo, she thought,
and get warm: get in his bed now, press myself against his back while he sleeps,
go to sleep myself. But she gave it up. She felt on her face the pretty little
expression she had made when she said to Bruno: Trust me, I have a small child, I
didn’t do this thing, a charming affectation, perhaps seductive, the body of a
woman acting autonomously in spite of disgust. She was ashamed: how could
she behave like that, after what Soccavo had done to her in the drying room?
And yet. Ah, to push men and drive them like obedient beasts toward goals
that were not theirs. No, no, enough, in the past she had done it for different
reasons, almost without realizing it, with Stefano, with Nino, with the Solaras,
maybe even with Enzo. Now she didn’t want to anymore, she would take care
of things herself: with the guard, with her fellow workers, with the students,
with Soccavo, with her own mind, which, full of demands, would not resign
itself and, worn out by the impact of persons and things, was collapsing.
34.
Upon waking she discovered that she had a fever; she took an aspirin and
went to work anyway. In the still dark sky there was a weak bluish light that
licked the low buildings, the muddy weeds and refuse. Already as she skirted
the puddles on the unpaved stretch of road that led to the factory, she noticed
that there were four students, the two from the day before, a third about the
same age, and a fat kid, decidedly obese, around twenty years old. They were
pasting on the boundary wall placards that called on the workers to join the
struggle, and had just begun to hand out a leaflet of the same type. But if, the
day  before,  the  workers,  out  of  curiosity,  out  of  courtesy,  had  taken  the
pamphlet, the majority now either kept going with their heads down or took
the sheet and immediately crumpled it up and threw it away.
As soon as she saw that the youths were there, punctual as if what they
called political work had a schedule stricter than hers, Lila was annoyed. The
annoyance became hostility when the boy from the day before recognized her
and hurried toward her, with a friendly expression, and a large number of
leaflets in his hand.
“Everything all right, Comrade?”
Lila paid no attention, her throat was sore, her temples pounding. The boy
ran after her, said uncertainly:
“I’m Dario, maybe you don’t remember, we met on Via dei Tribunali.”
“I know who the fuck you are,” she snapped, “but I don’t want to have
anything to do with you or your friends.”
Dario was speechless, he slowed down, he said almost to himself:
“You don’t want the leaflet?”
Lila didn’t answer, so that she wouldn’t yell something hostile at him. But
the boy’s disoriented face, wearing the expression people have when they feel
they are right and don’t understand how it is that others don’t share their
opinion, stayed in her mind. She thought that she ought to explain to him
carefully why she had said the things she had said at the meeting, and why she
found it intolerable that those things had ended up in the pamphlet, and why
she judged it pointless and stupid that the four of them, instead of still being in
bed or about to enter a classroom, were standing there in the cold handing out
a  densely  written  leaflet  to  people  who  had  difficulty  reading,  and  who,
besides, had no reason to subject themselves to the effort of reading, since they
already knew those things, they lived them every day, and could tell even
worse: unrepeatable sounds that no one would ever say, write, or read, and
that nevertheless held as potential the real causes of their inferiority. But she
had a fever, she was tired of everything, it would cost her too much effort. And
anyway  she  had  reached  the  gate,  and  there  the  situation  was  becoming
complicated.
The guard was yelling at the oldest boy, the fat one, shouting at him in
dialect: You cross that line, cross it, shit, then you’re entering private property
without permission and I’ll shoot. The student, also agitated, replied with a
laugh, a broad aggressive laugh, accompanied by insults: he called him a slave,
he  shouted,  in  Italian,  Shoot,  show  me  how  you  shoot,  this  isn’t  private
property, everything in there belongs to the people. Lila passed both of them—
how many times had she witnessed bluster like that: Rino, Antonio, Pasquale,
even Enzo were masters of it—and said to Filippo, seriously: Satisfy him, don’t
waste time chattering, someone who could be sleeping or studying and instead
is here being a pain in the ass deserves to be shot. The guard saw her, heard
her, and, openmouthed, tried to decide if she was really encouraging him to do
something crazy or making fun of him. The student had no doubts: he stared at
her angrily, shouted: Go on, go in, go kiss the boss’s ass, and he retreated a few
steps, shaking his head, then he continued to hand out leaflets a few meters
from the gate.
Lila headed toward the courtyard. She was already tired at seven in the
morning,  her  eyes  were  burning,  eight  hours  of  work  seemed  an  eternity.
Meanwhile  behind  her  there  was  a  noise  of  screeching  brakes  and  men
shouting,  and  she  turned.  Two  cars  had  arrived,  one  gray  and  one  blue.
Someone had got out of the first car and begun to tear off the placards that had
just been pasted on the wall. It’s getting bad, Lila thought, and instinctively
went back, although she knew that, like the others, she ought to hurry in and
start work.
She took a few steps, enough to identify the youth at the wheel of the gray
car: it was Gino. She saw him open the door and, tall, muscular as he had
become, get out of the car holding a stick. The others, the ones who were
tearing off the posters, the ones who, more slowly, were still getting out of the
cars, seven or eight in all, were carrying chains and metal bars. Fascists, mostly
from the neighborhood, Lila knew some of them. Fascists, as Stefano’s father,
Don Achille, had been, as Stefano had turned out to be, as the Solaras were,
grandfather, father, grandsons, even if at times they acted like monarchists, at
times Christian Democrats, as it suited them. She had hated them ever since, as
a  girl,  she  had  imagined  every  detail  of  their  obscenities,  since  she  had
discovered that there was no way to be free of them, to clear everything away.
The connection between past and present had never really broken down, the
neighborhood  loved  them  by  a  large  majority,  pampered  them,  and  they
showed up with their filth whenever there was a chance to fight.
Dario, the boy from Via dei Tribunali, was the first to move, he rushed to
protest the torn-down posters. He was holding the ream of leaflets, and Lila
thought: Throw them away, you idiot, but he didn’t. She heard him saying in
Italian useless things like Stop it, you have no right, and at the same time saw
him turn to his friends for help. He doesn’t know anything about fighting:
never lose sight of your adversary, in the neighborhood there’d be no talk, at
most there’d be some yelling, wide-eyed, to inspire fear, and meanwhile you
were the first to strike, causing as much injury as possible, without stopping—
it was up to others to stop you if they could. One of the youths who were
tearing down the posters acted just like that: he punched Dario in the face,
with  no  warning,  knocking  him  to  the  ground  amid  the  leaflets  he  had
dropped, and then he was on him, hitting him, while the pages flew around as
if there were a fierce excitement in the things themselves. At that point the
obese student saw that the boy was on the ground and hurried to help him,
bare-handed, but he was blocked halfway by someone armed with a chain, who
hit him on the arm. The youth grabbed the chain furiously, and started pulling
on it, to tear it away from his attacker, and for several seconds they fought for
it, screaming insults at one another. Until Gino came up behind the fat student
and hit him with the stick, knocking him down.
Lila forgot her fever and her exhaustion, and ran to the gate, but without a
precise purpose. She didn’t know if she wanted to have a better view, if she
wanted to help the students, if she was simply moved by an instinct she had
always had, by virtue of which fighting didn’t frighten her but, rather, kindled
her fury. She wasn’t in time to return to the street, she had to jump aside in
order not to be run over by a group of workers who were rushing through the
gate. A few had tried to stop the attackers, including Edo, certainly, but they
hadn’t  been  able  to,  and  now  they  were  escaping.  Men  and  women  were
running, pursued by two youths holding iron bars. A woman named Isa, an
office worker, ran toward Filippo yelling: Help, do something, call the police,
and Edo, one of whose hands was bleeding, said aloud to himself: I’m going to
get the hatchet and then we’ll see. So by the time Lila reached the unpaved
road, the blue car had already left and Gino was getting into the gray one, but
he recognized her and paused, astonished, saying: Lina, you’ve ended up here?
Then, pulled in by his comrades, he started the engine and drove off, but he
shouted out window: You acted the lady, bitch, and look what the fuck you’ve
become.
35.
The workday passed in an anxiety that, as usual, Lila contained behind an
attitude that at one moment was contemptuous, the next threatening. They all
made it clear that they blamed her for the tensions that had emerged suddenly
in a place that had always been peaceful. But soon two parties formed: one, a
small  group,  wanted  to  meet  somewhere  during  the  lunch  break  and  take
advantage of the situation to urge Lila to go to the owner with some cautious
wage demands; the other, the majority, wouldn’t even speak to Lila and was
opposed to any undertaking that would complicate a work life that was already
complicated. Between the two groups there was no way to reach agreement. In
fact Edo, who belonged to the first party and was worried about the injury to
his hand, went so far as to say to someone who belonged to the second: If my
hand gets infected, if they cut it off, I’m coming to your house, I’ll pour a can of
gasoline on it, and set you and your family on fire. Lila ignored both factions.
She kept to herself and worked, head down, with her usual efficiency, driving
away the conversation, the insults, and the cold. But she reflected on what
awaited her, a whirl of different thoughts passed through her feverish head:
what had happened to the injured students, where had they gone, what trouble
had they got her into; Gino would talk about her in the neighborhood, he
would  tell  Michele  Solara  everything;  it  was  humiliating  to  ask  Bruno  for
favors, and yet there was no other way, she was afraid of being fired, she was
afraid of losing a salary that, even though it was miserable, allowed her to love
Enzo  without  considering  him  fundamental  to  her  survival  and  that  of
Gennaro.
Then she remembered the terrible night. What had happened to her, should
she  go  to  a  doctor?  And  if  the  doctor  found  some  illness,  how  would  she
manage with work and the child? Careful, don’t get agitated, she needed to put
things in order. Therefore, during the lunch break, oppressed by her cares, she
resigned herself to going to Bruno. She wanted to tell him about the nasty trick
of the sausage, about Gino’s fascists, reiterate that it wasn’t her fault. First,
however, despising herself, she went to the bathroom to comb her hair and put
on a little lipstick. But the secretary said with hostility that Bruno wasn’t there
and  almost  certainly  wouldn’t  be  all  week.  Anxiety  gripped  her  again.
Increasingly nervous, she thought of asking Pasquale to keep the students from
returning  to  the  gate,  she  said  to  herself  that,  once  the  boys  from  the
committee disappeared, the fascists, too, would disappear, the factory would
settle back into its old ways. But how to find Peluso? She didn’t know where he
worked, she didn’t want to look for him in the neighborhood—she was afraid of
running into her mother, her father, and especially her brother, with whom
she  didn’t  want  to  fight.  So,  exhausted,  she  added  up  all  her  troubles  and
decided to turn directly to Nadia. At the end of her shift she hurried home, left
a note for Enzo to prepare dinner, bundled Gennaro up carefully in coat and
hat, and set off, bus after bus, to Corso Vittorio Emanuele.
The sky was pastel-colored, with not even a puff of a cloud, but the late-
afternoon light was fading and a strong wind was blowing in the violet air. She
remembered the house in detail, the entrance, all of it, and the humiliation of
the past intensified the bitterness of the present. How brittle the past was,
continually crumbling, falling on her. From that house where she had gone
with me to a party that had made her suffer, Nadia, Nino’s old girlfriend, had
tumbled out to make her suffer even more. But she wasn’t one to stay quiet,
she walked up the hill, dragging Gennaro. She wanted to say to that girl: You
and the others are making trouble for my son; for you it’s only an amusement,
nothing terrible will happen to you; for me, for him, no, it’s a serious thing, so
either  do  something  to  fix  it  or  I’ll  bash  your  face  in.  That  was  what  she
intended to say, and she coughed and her rage mounted; she couldn’t wait to
explode.
She found the street door open. She climbed the stairs, she remembered
herself and me, and Stefano, who had taken us to the party, the clothes, the
shoes, every word that we had said to each other on the way and on the way
back.  She  rang,  Professor  Galiani  herself  opened  the  door,  just  as  she
remembered her, polite, orderly, just like her house. In comparison Lila felt
dirty, because of the odor of raw meat that clung to her, the cold that clogged
her chest, the fever that confused her feelings, the child whose whining in
dialect irritated her. She asked abruptly: “Is Nadia here?”
“No, she’s out.”
“When will she be back?”
“I’m sorry, I don’t know, in ten minutes, in an hour, she does as she likes.”
“Could you tell her that Lina came to see her?”
“Is it urgent?”
“Yes.”
“Do you want to tell me?”
Tell her what? Lila gave a start, she looked past the professor. She glimpsed
the ancient nobility of furniture and lamps, the book-filled library that had
captivated her, the precious paintings on the walls. She thought: This is the
world that Nino aspired to before he got mixed up with me. She thought: What
do I know of this other Naples, nothing; I’ll never live there and neither will
Gennaro. Let it be destroyed, then, let fire and ashes come, let the lava reach
the top of the hills. Then finally she answered: No, thank you, I have to talk to
Nadia. And she was about to leave, it had been a fruitless journey. But she liked
the hostile attitude with which the professor had spoken of her daughter and
she exclaimed in a suddenly frivolous tone: “Do you know that years ago I was
in this house at a party? I don’t know what I expected, but I was bored, I
couldn’t wait to leave.”
36.
Professor  Galiani,  too,  must  have  seen  something  she  liked,  maybe  a
frankness  verging  on  rudeness.  When  Lila  mentioned  our  friendship,  the
professor  seemed  pleased,  she  exclaimed:  Ah  yes,  Greco,  we  never  see  her
anymore, success has gone to her head. Then she led mother and son to the
living room, where she had left her grandson playing, a blond child whom she
almost ordered: Marco, say hello to our new friend. Lila in turn pushed her son
forward, she said, go on, Gennaro, play with Marco, and she sat in an old,
comfortable  green  armchair,  still  talking  about  the  party  years  ago.  The
professor  was  sorry  she  had  no  recollection  of  it,  but  Lila  remembered
everything. She said that it had been one of the worst nights of her life. She
spoke of how out of place she had felt, she described in sarcastic tones the
conversations she had listened to without understanding anything. I was very
ignorant, she exclaimed, with an excessive gaiety, and today even more than I
was then.
Professor  Galiani  listened  and  was  impressed  by  her  sincerity,  by  her
unsettling  tone,  by  the  intense  Italian  of  her  sentences,  by  her  skillfully
controlled irony. She must have felt in Lila, I imagine, that elusive quality that
seduced  and  at  the  same  time  alarmed,  a  siren  power:  it  could  happen  to
anyone, it happened to her, and the conversation broke off only when Gennaro
slapped Marco, insulting him in dialect and grabbing a small green car. Lila got
up quickly, and, seizing her son by the arm, forcefully slapped the hand that
had hit the other child, and although Professor Galiani said weakly, Let it go,
they’re children, she rebuked him harshly, insisting that he return the toy.
Marco was crying, but Gennaro didn’t shed a tear; instead, he threw the toy at
him with contempt. Lila hit him again, hard, on the head.
“We’re going,” she said, nervously.
“No, stay a little longer.”
Lila sat down again.
“He’s not always like that.”
“He’s a very handsome child. Right, Gennaro, you’re a good boy?”
“He isn’t good, he isn’t at all good. But he’s clever. Even though he’s little, he
can read and write all the letters, capitals and small. What do you say, Gennà,
do you want to show the professor how you read?”
She picked up a magazine from a beautiful glass table, pointed to a word at
random on the cover, and said: Go on, read. Gennaro refused. Lila gave him a
pat on the shoulder, repeated in a threatening tone: Read, Gennà. The child
reluctantly deciphered, d-e-s-t, then he broke off, staring angrily at Marco’s
little  car.  Marco  hugged  it  to  his  chest,  gave  a  small  smile,  and  read
confidently: destinazione.
Lila was disappointed, she darkened, she looked at Galiani’s grandson with
annoyance.
“He reads well.”
“Because I devote a lot of time to him. His parents are always out.”
“How old is he?”
“Three and a half.”
“He seems older.”
“Yes, he’s sturdy. How old is your son?”
“He’s five,” Lila admitted reluctantly.
The professor caressed Gennaro, and said to him: “Mamma made you read a
difficult word, but you’re a clever boy, I can see that you know how to read.”
Just then there was a commotion, the door to the stairs opened and closed,
the sound of footsteps scurrying through the house, male voices, female voices.
Here  are  my  children,  Professor  Galiani  said,  and  called  out:  Nadia.  But  it
wasn’t Nadia who came into the room; instead a thin, very pale, very blond
girl, with eyes of a blue so blue that it looked fake, burst in noisily. The girl
opened wide her arms and cried to Marco: Who’s going to give his mamma a
kiss? The child ran to her and she embraced him, kissed him, followed by
Armando, Professor Galiani’s son. Lila remembered him, too, immediately, and
looked at him as he practically tore Marco from his mother’s arms, crying:
Immediately, at least thirty kisses for papa. Marco began to kiss his father on
the cheek, counting: One, two, three, four.
“Nadia,” Professor Galiani called again in a suddenly irritated tone, “are you
deaf? Come, there’s someone here to see you.”
Nadia finally looked into the room. Behind her was Pasquale.
37.
Lila’s bitterness exploded again. So Pasquale, when work was over, rushed to
the house of those people, amid mothers and fathers and grandmothers and
aunts and happy babies, all affectionate, all well educated, all so broad-minded
that  they  welcomed  him  as  one  of  them,  although  he  was  a  construction
worker and still bore the dirty traces of his job?
Nadia embraced her in her emotional way. Lucky you’re here, she said, leave
the child with my mother, we have to talk. Lila replied aggressively that yes,
they had to talk, right away, that’s why she was there. And since she said
emphatically that she had only a minute, Pasquale offered to take her home in
the car. So they left the living room, the children, the grandmother, and met—
also Armando, also the blond girl, whose name was Isabella—in Nadia’s room, a
large room with a bed, a desk, shelves full of books, posters showing singers,
films, and revolutionary struggles that Lila knew little about. There were three
other young men, two whom she had never seen, and Dario, banged up from
the beating he’d had, sprawled on Nadia’s bed with his shoes on the pink quilt.
All three were smoking, the room was full of smoke. Lila didn’t wait, she didn’t
even respond to Dario’s greeting. She said that they had got her in trouble, that
their lack of consideration had put her at risk of being fired, that the pamphlet
had caused an uproar, that they shouldn’t come to the gate anymore, that
because of them the fascists had showed up and everyone was now angry with
both the reds and the blacks. She hissed at Dario: As for you, if you don’t know
how  to  fight  stay  home,  you  know  they  could  kill  you?  Pasquale  tried  to
interrupt her a few times, but she cut him off contemptuously, as if his mere
presence in that house were a betrayal. The others instead listened in silence.
Only when Lila had finished, did Armando speak. He had his mother’s delicate
features, and thick black eyebrows; the violet trace of his carefully shaved
beard  rose  to  his  cheekbones,  and  he  spoke  in  a  warm,  thick  voice.  He
introduced  himself,  he  said  that  he  was  very  happy  to  meet  her,  that  he
regretted he hadn’t been there when she spoke at the meeting, that, however,
what she had told them they had discussed among themselves and since they
had  considered  it  an  important  contribution  they  had  decided  to  put
everything in writing. Don’t worry, he concluded calmly, we’ll support you and
your comrades in every way.
Lila coughed, the smoke in the room irritated her throat.
“You should have informed me.”
“It’s true, but there wasn’t time.”
“If you really want the time you find it.”
“We are few and our initiatives are more every day.”
“What work do you do?”
“In what sense?”
“What do you do for a living?”
“I’m a doctor.”
“Like your father?”
“Yes.”
“And at this moment are you risking your job? Could you end up in the
street at any moment along with your son?”
Armando shook his head unhappily and said: “Competing for who is risking
the most is wrong, Lina.”
And Pasquale:
“He’s been arrested twice and I have eight charges against me. Nobody here
risks more or less than anyone else.”
“Oh, no?”
“No,”  said  Nadia,  “we’re  all  in  the  front  lines  and  ready  to  assume  our
responsibilities.”
Then Lila, forgetting that she was in someone else’s house, cried: “So if I
should  lose  my  job,  I’ll  come  and  live  here,  you’ll  feed  me,  you’ll  assume
responsibility for my life?”
Nadia answered placidly:
“If you like, yes.”
Four  words  only.  Lila  understood  that  it  wasn’t  a  joke,  that  Nadia  was
serious, that even if Bruno Soccavo fired his entire work force she, with that
sickly-sweet voice of hers, would give the same senseless answer. She claimed
that she was in the service of the workers, and yet, from her room in a house
full of books and with a view of the sea, she wanted to command you, she
wanted to tell you what you should do with your work, she decided for you, she
had the solution ready even if you ended up in the street. I—it was on the tip of
Lila’s tongue—if I want, can smash everything much better than you: I don’t
need you to tell me, in that sanctimonious tone, how I should think, what I
should do. But she restrained herself, and said abruptly to Pasquale: “I’m in a
hurry, are you going to take me or are you staying here?”
Silence. Pasquale glanced at Nadia, muttered, I’ll take you, and Lila started to
leave  the  room,  without  saying  goodbye.  The  girl  rushed  to  lead  the  way,
saying  to  her  how  unacceptable  it  was  to  work  in  the  conditions  that  Lila
herself had described so well, how urgent it was to kindle the spark of the
struggle, and other phrases like that. Don’t pull back, she urged, finally, before
they went into the living room. But she got no response.
Professor Galiani, sitting in the armchair, was reading, a frown on her face.
When  she  looked  up  she  spoke  to  Lila,  ignoring  her  daughter,  ignoring
Pasquale, who had just arrived, embarrassed.
“You’re leaving?”
“Yes, it’s late. Let’s go, Gennaro, leave Marco his car and put your coat on.”
Professor Galiani smiled at her grandson, who was pouting.
“Marco gave it to him.”
Lila narrowed her eyes, reduced them to cracks.
“You’re all so generous in this house, thank you.”
The professor watched as she struggled with her son to get his coat on.
“May I ask you something?”
“Go ahead.”
“What did you study?”
The question seemed to irritate Nadia, who broke in: “Mamma, Lina has to
go.”
For the first time Lila noticed some nervousness in the child’s voice, and it
pleased her.
“Will you let me have two words?” Professor Galiani snapped, in a tone no
less nervous. Then she repeated to Lila, but kindly: “What did you study?”
“Nothing.”
“To hear you speak—and shout—it doesn’t seem so.”
“It’s true, I stopped after fifth grade.”
“Why?”
“I didn’t have the ability.”
“How did you know?”
“Greco had it, I didn’t.”
Professor Galiani shook her head in a sign of disagreement, and said: “If you
had studied you would have been as successful as Greco.”
“How can you say that?”
“It’s my job.”
“You professors insist so much on education because that’s how you earn a
living, but studying is of no use, it doesn’t even improve you—in fact it makes
you even more wicked.”
“Has Elena become more wicked?”
“No, not her.”
“Why not?”
Lila stuck the wool cap on her son’s head. “We made a pact when we were
children: I’m the wicked one.”
38.
In  the  car  she  got  mad  at  Pasquale  (Have  you  become  the  servant  of  those
people?) and he let her vent. Only when it seemed to him that she had come to
the end of her recriminations did he start off with his political formulas: the
condition of workers in the South, the condition of slavery in which they lived,
the permanent blackmail, the weakness if not absence of unions, the need to
force situations and reach the point of struggle. Lina, he said in dialect, his
tone heartfelt, you’re afraid of losing the few cents they give you and you’re
right, Gennaro has to grow up. But I know that you are a true comrade, I know
that  you  understand:  here  we  workers  have  never  even  been  within  the
regular wage scales, we’re outside all the rules, we’re less than zero. So, it’s
blasphemy to say: leave me alone, I have my own problems and I want to mind
my own business. Each of us, in the place assigned to us, has to do what he can.
Lila was exhausted; fortunately Gennaro was sleeping on the back seat with
the  little  car  clutched  in  his  right  hand.  Pasquale’s  speech  came  to  her  in
waves.  Every  so  often  the  beautiful  apartment  on  Corso  Vittorio  Emanuele
came into her mind, along with the professor and Armando and Isabella and
Nino, who had gone off to find a wife somewhere of Nadia’s type, and Marco,
who  was  three  and  could  read  much  better  than  her  son.  What  a  useless
struggle to make Gennaro become smart. The child was already losing, he was
being pulled back and she couldn’t hold on to him. When they reached the
house and she saw that she had to invite Pasquale in she said: I don’t know
what Enzo’s made, he’s a terrible cook, maybe you don’t feel like it, and hoped
he would leave. But he answered: I’ll stay ten minutes, then go, so she touched
his arm with her fingertips and murmured: “Don’t tell him anything.”
“Anything about what?”
“About the fascists. If he knows, he’ll go and beat up Gino tonight.”
“Do you love him?”
“I don’t want to hurt him.”
“Ah.”
“That’s the way it is.”
“Remember  that  Enzo  knows  better  than  you  and  me  what  needs  to  be
done.”
“Yes, but don’t say anything to him just the same.”
Pasquale agreed with a scowl. He picked up Gennaro, who wouldn’t wake up,
and carried him up the stairs, followed by Lila, who was mumbling unhappily:
What a day, I’m dead tired, you and your friends have got me in huge trouble.
They told Enzo that they had gone to Nadia’s house for a meeting, and Pasquale
gave  him  no  chance  to  ask  questions,  he  talked  without  stopping  until
midnight. He said that Naples, like the whole world, was churning with new
life, he praised Armando, who, good doctor that he was, instead of thinking of
his career treated the poor for nothing, he took care of the children in the
Quartieri and with Nadia and Isabella was involved in countless projects that
served the people—a nursery school, a clinic. He said that no one was alone any
longer, comrades helped comrades, the city was going through a wonderful
time. You two, he said, shouldn’t stay shut up here in the house, you should go
out,  we  should  be  together  more.  And  finally  he  announced  that  he  was
finished  with  the  Communist  Party:  too  many  ugly  things,  too  many
compromises,  national  and  international,  he  couldn’t  stand  that  dreariness
anymore. Enzo was deeply disturbed by his decision, they argued about it for a
long  time:  the  party  is  the  party,  no,  yes,  no,  enough  with  the  politics  of
stabilization, we need to attack the institutional structures of the system. Lila
quickly became bored, and she went to put Gennaro to bed—he was sleepy,
whining as he ate his supper—and didn’t return.
But she stayed awake even when Pasquale left and the evidence of Enzo’s
presence in the house had been extinguished. She took her temperature, it was
100. She recalled the moment when Gennaro had struggled to read. What sort
of word had she put in front of him: destination. Certainly it was a word that
Gennaro had never heard. It’s not enough to know the alphabet, she thought,
there are so many difficulties. If Nino had had him with Nadia, that child would
have had a completely different destiny. She felt she was the wrong mother.
And yet I wanted him, she thought, it was with Stefano that I didn’t want
children, with Nino yes. She had truly loved Nino. She had desired him deeply,
she  had  desired  to  please  him  and  for  his  pleasure  had  done  willingly
everything that with her husband she had had to do by force, overcoming
disgust, in order not to be killed. But she had never felt what it was said she
was supposed to feel when she was penetrated, that she was sure of, and not
only with Stefano but also with Nino. Males were so attached to their penis,
they were so proud of it, and they were convinced that you should be even
more attached to it than they were. Even Gennaro was always playing with his;
sometimes it was embarrassing how much he jiggled it in his hands, how much
he pulled it. Lila was afraid he would hurt himself; and even to wash it, or get
him to pee, she had had to make an effort, get used to it. Enzo was so discreet,
never in his underwear in the house, never a vulgar word. For that reason she
felt an intense affection for him, and was grateful to him for his devoted wait
in the other room, which had never been interrupted by a wrong move. The
control  he  exercised  over  things  and  himself  seemed  to  her  the  only
consolation. But then a sense of guilt emerged: what consoled her surely made
him suffer. And the thought that Enzo was suffering because of her was added
to  all  the  terrible  things  of  that  day.  Events  and  conversations  whirled
chaotically in her head for a long time. Tones of voice, single words. How
should she act the next day in the factory? Was there really all that fervor in
Naples and the world, or were Pasquale and Nadia and Armando imagining it to
allay their anxieties, out of boredom, to give themselves courage? Should she
trust them, with the risk of becoming captive to fantasies? Or was it better to
look for Bruno again to get her out of trouble? But would it really be any use
trying to placate him, with the risk that he might jump on her again? Would it
help to give in to the abuses of Filippo and the supervisors? She didn’t make
much progress. In the end, in a waking sleep, she landed on an old principle
that we two had assimilated since we were little. It seemed to her that to save
herself, to save Gennaro, she had to intimidate those who wished to intimidate
her, she had to inspire fear in those who wished to make her fear. She fell
asleep with the intention of doing harm, to Nadia by showing her that she was
just a girl from a good family, all sugary chatter, to Soccavo by ruining the
pleasure he got in sniffing salamis and women in the drying room.
39.
She woke at five in the morning, in a sweat; she no longer had a fever. At the
factory gate she found not the students but the fascists. Same automobiles,
same faces as the day before: they were shouting slogans, handing out leaflets.
Lila felt that more violence was planned and she walked with her head down,
hands in pockets, hoping to get into the factory before the fighting started. But
Gino appeared in front of her.
“You still know how to read?” he asked in dialect, holding out a leaflet.
Keeping her hands in her pockets, she replied: “I do, yes, but when did you
learn?”
Then she tried to go by, in vain. Gino obstructed her, he jammed the leaflet
into her pocket with a gesture so violent that he scratched her hand with his
nail. Lila crumpled it up calmly.
“It’s not even good for wiping your ass,” she said and threw it away.
“Pick it up,” the pharmacist’s son ordered her, grabbing her by the arm.
“Pick it up now and you listen to me: yesterday afternoon I asked that cuckold
your husband for permission to beat you up and he said yes.”
Lila  looked  him  straight  in  the  eye:  “You  went  to  ask  my  husband  for
permission to beat me up? Let go of my arm right now, you shit.”
At that moment Edo arrived, and instead of pretending not to notice, as was
to be expected, he stopped.
“Is he bothering you, Cerù?”
It  was  an  instant.  Gino  punched  him  in  the  face,  Edo  ended  up  on  the
ground. Lila’s heart jumped to her throat, and everything began to speed up.
She picked up a rock and gripping it solidly struck the pharmacist’s son right
in the chest. There was a long moment. While Gino shoved her back against a
light pole, while Edo tried to get up, another car appeared on the unpaved
road,  raising  dust.  Lila  recognized  Pasquale’s  broken-down  car.  Here,  she
thought, Armando listened to me, maybe Nadia, too, they’re well-brought-up
people, but Pasquale couldn’t resist, he’s coming to make war. In fact the doors
opened,  and  five  men  got  out,  including  him.  They  were  men  from  the
construction sites, carrying knotty clubs, and they began hitting the fascists
with a methodical ferocity; they didn’t get angry, they planted a single, precise
blow  intended  to  knock  down  the  adversary.  Lila  immediately  saw  that
Pasquale was heading toward Gino, and since Gino was still a few steps away
from her she grabbed one of his arms with both hands and said, laughing:
You’d better go or they’ll kill you. But he didn’t go; rather, he pushed her away
again and rushed at Pasquale. Lila helped Edo get up, and tried to drag him into
the courtyard, but it was difficult; he was heavy, and he was writhing, shouting
insults, bleeding. He calmed down a little only when he saw Pasquale hit Gino
with his stick and knock him to the ground. The confusion increased: debris
the men picked up along the side of the street flew like bullets, men were
spitting and screaming insults. Pasquale, leaving Gino unconscious, had rushed
into the courtyard, with a man wearing only an undershirt and loose blue
pants streaked with cement. Both were now bludgeoning Filippo’s booth; he
was locked inside, terrorized. Shouting obscenities, they smashed the windows,
while the wail of a police siren grew louder. Lila noticed yet again the anxious
pleasure of violence. Yes, she thought, you have to strike fear into those who
wish to strike fear into you, there is no other way, blow for blow, what you take
from me I take back, what you do to me I do to you. But while Pasquale and his
people were getting back in the car, while the fascists did the same, carrying
off Gino bodily, while the police siren got closer, she felt, terrified, that her
heart was becoming like the too tightly wound spring of a toy, and she knew
that she had to find a place to sit down as soon as possible. Once she was inside,
she collapsed in the hallway, her back against the wall, and tried to calm down.
Teresa, the large woman in her forties who worked in the gutting room, was
looking after Edo, wiping the blood off his face, and she teased Lila.
“First you pull off his ear, then you help him? You should have left him
outside.”
“He helped me and I helped him.”
Teresa turned to Edo, incredulous:
“You helped her?”
He stammered:
“I didn’t like to see a stranger beating her up, I want to do it myself.”
The woman said:
“Did you see how Filippo shat himself?”
“Serves him right,” Edo muttered, “too bad all they broke was the booth.”
Teresa turned to Lila and asked her, with a hint of malice: “Did you call the
Communists? Tell the truth.”
Is she joking, Lila wondered, or is she a spy, who’ll go running to the owner.
“No,” she answered, “but I know who called the fascists.”
“Who?”
“Soccavo.”
40.
Pasquale appeared that evening, after dinner, with a grim expression, and
invited Enzo to a meeting at the San Giovanni a Teduccio section. Lila, alone
with him for a few minutes, said: “That was a shitty thing to do, this morning.”
“I do what’s necessary.”
“Did your friends agree with you?”
“Who are my friends?”
“Nadia and her brother.”
“Of course they agreed.”
“But they stayed home.”
Pasquale muttered:
“And who says they stayed home?”
He wasn’t in a good mood, in fact he seemed emptied of energy, as if the
practice of violence had swallowed up his craving for action. Further, he hadn’t
asked her to go to the meeting, he had invited only Enzo, something that never
happened, even when it was late, and cold, and unlikely that she would take
Gennaro out. Maybe they had other male wars to fight. Maybe he was angry
with her because, with her resistance to the struggle, she had caused him to
look bad in front of Nadia and Armando. Certainly he was bothered by the
critical  tone  she  had  used  in  alluding  to  the  morning’s  expedition.  He’s
convinced, Lila thought, that I don’t understand why he hit Gino like that, why
he wanted to beat up the guard. Good or bad, all men believe that after every
one of their undertakings you have to put them on an altar as if they were St.
George slaying the dragon. He considers me ungrateful, he did it to avenge me,
he would like me to at least say thank you.
When the two left, she got in bed and read the pamphlets on work and
unions  that  Pasquale  had  given  her  long  ago.  They  helped  to  keep  her
anchored to the dull things of every day, she was afraid of the silence of the
house, of sleep, of her unruly heartbeats, of the shapes that threatened to
break apart at any moment. In spite of her weariness, she read for a long time,
and in her usual way became excited, and learned a lot of things quickly. To
feel safe, she made an effort to wait for Enzo to return. But he didn’t, and
finally the sound of Gennaro’s regular breathing became hypnotic and she fell
asleep.
The next morning Edo and the woman from the gutting room, Teresa, began
to hang around her with timid, friendly words and gestures. And Lila not only
didn’t  rebuff  them  but  treated  the  other  workers  courteously  as  well.  She
showed herself available to those who were complaining, understanding to
those who were angry, sympathetic toward those who cursed the abuses. She
steered the trouble of one toward the trouble of another, joining all together
with eloquent words. Above all, in the following days, she let Edo and Teresa
and their tiny group talk, transforming the lunch break into a time for secret
meeting. Since she could, when she wanted, give the impression that it wasn’t
she who was proposing and disposing but the others, she found more and more
people happy to hear themselves say that their general complaints were just
and urgent necessities. She added the claims of the gutting room to those of
the refrigerated rooms, and those of the vats, and discovered to her surprise
that the troubles of one department depended on the troubles of another, and
that all together were links in the same chain of exploitation. She made a
detailed list of the illnesses caused by the working conditions: damage to the
hands, the bones, the lungs. She gathered enough information to demonstrate
that the entire factory was in terrible shape, that the hygienic conditions were
deplorable, that the raw material they handled was sometimes spoiled or of
uncertain  origin.  When  she  was  able  to  talk  to  Pasquale  in  private  she
explained to him what in a very short time she had started up, and he, in his
peevish way, was astonished, then said beaming: I would have sworn that you
would do it, and he set up an appointment with a man named Capone, who was
secretary of the union local.
Lila copied down on paper in her fine handwriting everything she had done
and brought the copy to Capone. The secretary examined the pages, and he,
too, was enthusiastic. He said to her things like: Where did you come from,
Comrade,  you’ve  done  really  great  work,  bravo.  And  besides,  we’ve  never
managed to get into the Soccavo plant; they’re all fascists in there, but now
that you’ve arrived things have changed.
“How should we start?” she asked.
“Form a committee.”
“We already are a committee.”
“Good: the first thing is to organize all this.”
“In what sense organize?”
Capone looked at Pasquale, Pasquale said nothing.
“You’re asking for too many things at once, including things that have never
been asked for anywhere—you have to establish priorities.”
“In that place everything is a priority.”
“I know, but it’s a question of tactics: if you want everything at once you risk
defeat.”
Lila narrowed her eyes to cracks; there was some bickering. It emerged that,
among other things, the committee couldn’t go and negotiate directly with the
owner, the union had to mediate.
“And am I not the union?” she flared up.
“Of course, but there are times and ways.”
They  quarreled  again.  Capone  said:  You  look  around  a  little,  open  the
discussion, I don’t know, about the shifts, about holidays, about overtime, and
we’ll take it from there. Anyway—he concluded—you don’t know how happy I
am to have a comrade like you, it’s a rare thing; let’s coordinate, and we’ll
make great strides in the food industry—there aren’t many women who get
involved. At that point he put his hand on his wallet, which was in his back
pocket, and asked: “Do you want some money for expenses?”
“What expenses?”
“Mimeographing, paper, the time you lose, things like that.”
“No.”
Capone put the wallet back in his pocket.
“But don’t get discouraged and disappear, Lina, let’s keep in touch. Look, I’m
writing down here your name and surname, I want to talk about you at the
union, we have to use you.”
Lila left dissatisfied, she said to Pasquale: Who did you bring me to? But he
calmed her, assured her that Capone was an excellent person, said he was
right, you had to understand, there was strategy and there were tactics. Then
he became excited, almost moved, he was about to embrace her, had second
thoughts, said: Move ahead, Lina, screw the bureaucracy, meanwhile I’ll inform
the committee.
Lila didn’t choose among the objectives. She confined herself to compressing
the first draft, which was very long, into one densely written sheet, which she
handed over to Edo: a list of requests that had to do with the organization of
the work, the pace, the general condition of the factory, the quality of the
product,  the  permanent  risk  of  being  injured  or  sick,  the  wretched
compensations, wage increases. At that point the problem arose of who was to
carry that list to Bruno.
“You go,” Lila said to Edo.
“I get angry easily.”
“Better.”
“I’m not suitable.”
“You’re very suitable.”
“No, you go, you’re a member of the union. And then you’re a good speaker,
you’ll put him in his place right away.”
41.
Lila had known from the start that it would be up to her. She took her time;
she left Gennaro at the neighbor’s, and went with Pasquale to a meeting of the
committee on Via dei Tribunali, called to discuss also the Soccavo situation.
There were twelve this time, including Nadia, Armando, Isabella, and Pasquale.
Lila circulated the paper she had prepared for Capone; in that first version all
the demands were more carefully argued. Nadia read it attentively. In the end
she  said:  Pasquale  was  right,  you’re  one  of  those  people  who  don’t  hold
anything back, you’ve done a great job in a very short time. And in a tone of
sincere admiration she praised not only the political and union substance of
the document but the writing: You’re so clever, she said, I’ve never seen this
kind  of  material  written  about  in  this  way!  Still,  after  that  beginning,  she
advised her not to move to an immediate confrontation with Soccavo. And
Armando was of the same opinion.
“Let’s wait to get stronger and grow,” he said. “The situation concerning the
Soccavo factory needs to develop. We’ve got a foot in there, which is already a
great result, we can’t risk getting swept away out of pure recklessness.”
Dario asked:
“What do you propose?”
Nadia answered, addressing Lila: “Let’s have a wider meeting. Let’s meet as
soon  as  possible  with  your  comrades,  let’s  consolidate  your  structure,  and
maybe with your material prepare another pamphlet.”
Lila,  in  the  face  of  that  sudden  cautiousness,  felt  a  great,  aggressive
satisfaction. She said mockingly: “So in your view I’ve done this work and am
putting my job at risk to allow all of you to have a bigger meeting and another
pamphlet?”
But she was unable to enjoy that feeling of revenge. Suddenly Nadia, who
was right opposite her, began to vibrate like a window loose in its frame, and
dissolved.  For  no  evident  reason,  Lila’s  throat  tightened,  and  the  slightest
gestures of those present, even a blink, accelerated. She closed her eyes, leaned
against  the  back  of  the  broken  chair  she  was  sitting  on,  felt  she  was
suffocating.
“Is something wrong?” asked Armando.
Pasquale became upset.
“She gets overtired,” he said. “Lina, what’s wrong, do you want a glass of
water?”
Dario hurried to get some water, while Armando checked her pulse and
Pasquale, nervous, pressed her: “What do you feel, stretch your legs, breathe.”
Lila whispered that she was fine and abruptly pulled her wrist away from
Armando, saying she wanted to be left in peace for a minute. But when Dario
returned  with  the  water  she  drank  a  small  mouthful,  murmured  it  was
nothing, just a little flu.
“Do you have a fever?” Armando asked calmly.
“Today, no.”
“Cough, difficulty breathing?”
“A little, I can feel my heart beating in my throat.”
“Is it a little better now?”
“Yes.”
“Come into the other room.”
Lila didn’t want to, and yet she felt a vast sense of anguish. She obeyed, she
struggled to get up, she followed Armando, who had picked up a black leather
bag with gold clasps. They went into a large, cold room that Lila hadn’t seen
before, with three cots covered by dirty-looking old mattresses, a wardrobe
with a corroded mirror, a chest of drawers. She sat down on one of the beds,
exhausted:  she  hadn’t  had  a  medical  examination  since  she  was  pregnant.
When Armando asked about her symptoms, she mentioned only the weight in
her chest, but added: It’s nothing.
He  examined  her  in  silence  and  she  immediately  hated  that  silence,  it
seemed  a  treacherous  silence.  That  detached,  clean  man,  although  he  was
asking questions, did not seem to trust the answers. He examined her as if only
her body, aided by instruments and expertise, were a reliable mechanism. He
listened to her chest, he touched her, he peered at her, and meanwhile he
forced her to wait for a conclusive opinion on what was happening in her
chest, in her stomach, in her throat, places apparently well known that now
seemed completely unknown. Finally Armando asked her: “Do you sleep well?”
“Very well.”
“How much?”
“It depends.”
“On what?”
“On my thoughts.”
“Do you eat enough?”
“When I feel like it.”
“Do you ever have difficulty breathing?”
“No.”
“Pain in your chest?”
“A weight, but light.”
“Cold sweats?”
“No.”
“Have you ever fainted or felt like fainting?”
“No.”
“Are you regular?”
“In what?”
“Menstruation.”
“No.”
“When did you last have a period?”
“I don’t know.”
“You don’t keep track?”
“Should I keep track?”
“It’s better. Do you use contraceptives?”
“What do you mean?”
“Condoms, coil, the Pill.”
“What Pill?”
“A new medicine: you take it and you can’t get pregnant.”
“Is that true?”
“Absolutely true. Your husband has never used a condom?”
“I don’t have a husband anymore.”
“He left you?”
“I left him.”
“When you were together did he use one?”
“I don’t even know how a condom is made.”
“Do you have a regular sex life?”
“What’s the use of talking about these things?”
“If you don’t want to we won’t.”
“I don’t want to.”
Armando put his instruments back in the case, sat down on a half-broken
chair, sighed.
“You should slow down, Lina: you’ve pushed your body too far.”
“What does that mean?”
“You’re undernourished, anxious, you’ve seriously neglected yourself.”
“And so?”
“You have a little catarrh, I’ll give you a syrup.”
“And so?”
“You should have a series of tests, your liver is a little enlarged.”
“I don’t have time for tests, give me some medicine.”
Armando shook his head discontentedly.
“Listen,” he said. “I understand that with you it’s better not to beat around
the bush: you have a murmur.”
“What’s that?”
“A problem with the heart, and it could be something that’s not benign.”
Lila made a grimace of anxiety.
“What do you mean? I might die?”
He smiled and said:
“No, only you should get checked by a cardiologist. Come see me in the
hospital tomorrow, and I’ll send you to someone good.”
Lila furrowed her brow, got up, said coldly: “I have a lot to do tomorrow, I’m
going to see Soccavo.”
42.
Pasquale’s worried tone exasperated her. As he was driving home he asked
her: “What did Armando say, how are you?”
“Fine, I should eat more.”
“You see, you don’t take care of yourself.”
Lila burst out: “Pasquà, you’re not my father, you’re not my brother, you’re
no one. Leave me alone, get it?”
“I can’t be worried about you?”
“No, and be careful what you do and say, especially with Enzo. If you tell him
I was ill—and it’s not true, I was only dizzy—you risk ruining our friendship.”
“Take two sick days and don’t go to Soccavo: Capone advised you against it
and the committee advised against it, it’s a matter of political expediency.”
“I don’t give a damn about political expediency: you’re the one who got me
in trouble and now I’ll do as I like.”
She didn’t invite him to come in and he went away angry. Once at home, Lila
cuddled Gennaro, made dinner, waited for Enzo. Now it seemed to her that she
was constantly short of breath. Since Enzo was late, she fed Gennaro; she was
afraid it was one of those evenings when he was seeing women and would
return in the middle of the night. When the child spilled a glass of water, the
caresses stopped, and she yelled at him as if he were an adult, in dialect: Will
you hold still a moment, I’ll hit you, why do you want to ruin my life?
Just then Enzo returned, and she tried to be nice. They ate, but Lila had the
impression that the food was struggling to get to her stomach, that it was
scratching  her  chest.  As  soon  as  Gennaro  fell  asleep,  they  turned  to  the
installments of the Zurich course, but Enzo soon got tired, and tried, politely,
to go to bed. His attempts were vain, Lila kept going until it was late, she was
afraid of shutting herself in her room, she feared that as soon as she was alone
in the dark the symptoms she hadn’t admitted to Armando would appear, all
together, and kill her. He asked her softly: “Will you tell me what’s wrong?”
“Nothing.”
“You come and go with Pasquale, why, what secrets do you have?”
“It’s things to do with the union, he made me join and now I have to take
care of them.”
Enzo looked disheartened, and she asked: “What’s wrong?”
“Pasquale told me what you’re doing in the factory. You told him and you
told the people on the committee. Why am I the only one who doesn’t deserve
to know?”
Lila became agitated, she got up, she went to the bathroom. Pasquale hadn’t
held out. What had he told? Only about the union seed that she wanted to
plant  at  Soccavo  or  also  about  Gino,  about  her  not  feeling  well  at  Via  dei
Tribunali? He hadn’t been able to stay silent—friendship between men had its
unwritten but inviolable pacts, not like that between women. She flushed the
toilet, returned to Enzo and said: “Pasquale is a spy.”
“Pasquale is a friend. Whereas you, what are you?”
His tone hurt, she gave in unexpectedly, suddenly. Her eyes filled with tears
and she tried in vain to push them back, humiliated by her own weakness.
“I don’t want to make more trouble for you than I already have,” she sobbed,
“I’m afraid  you’ll  send  me  away.”  Then  she blew  her  nose  and  added  in a
whisper: “Can I sleep with you?”
Enzo stared at her, in disbelief.
“Sleep how?”
“However you want.”
“And do you want it?”
Lila gazed at the water pitcher in the middle of the table, with its comical
rooster’s head: Gennaro liked it. She whispered: “The crucial thing is for you to
hold me close.”
Enzo shook his head unhappily.
“You don’t want me.”
“I want you, but I don’t feel anything.”
“You don’t feel anything for me?”
“What do you mean, I love you, and every night I wish you would call me
and hold me close. But beyond that I don’t want anything.”
Enzo turned pale, his handsome face was contorted as if by an intolerable
grief, and he observed: “I disgust you.”
“No, no, no, let’s do what you want, right away, I’m ready.”
He had a desolate smile, and was silent for a while. Then he couldn’t bear her
anxiety, he muttered: “Let’s go to bed.”
“Each in our own room?”
“No, in my bed.”
Lila, relieved, went to get undressed. She put on her nightgown, went to him
trembling with cold. He was already in bed.
“I’ll go here?”
“All right.”
She  slid  under  the  covers,  rested  her  head  on  his  shoulder,  put  an  arm
around his chest. Enzo remained motionless; she felt immediately that he gave
off a violent heat.
“My feet are cold,” she whispered, “can I put them near yours?”
“Yes.”
“Can I caress you a little?”
“Leave me alone.”
Slowly the cold disappeared. The pain in her chest dissolved, she forgot the
grip on her throat, she gave in to the respite of his warmth.
“Can I sleep?” she asked, dazed by weariness.
“Sleep.”
43.
At  dawn  she  started:  her  body  reminded  her  that  she  had  to  wake  up.
Immediately,  the  terrible  thoughts  arrived,  all  very  clear:  her  sick  heart,
Gennaro’s  regressions,  the  fascists  from  the  neighborhood,  Nadia’s  self-
importance, Pasquale’s untrustworthiness, the list of demands. Only afterward
did she realize that she had slept with Enzo, but that he was no longer in the
bed. She rose quickly, in time to hear the door closing. Had he arisen as soon as
she fell asleep? Had he been awake all night? Had he slept in the other room
with  the  child?  Or  had  he  fallen  asleep  with  her,  forgetting  every  desire?
Certainly he had had breakfast alone and had left the table set for her and
Gennaro.  He  had  gone  to  work,  without  a  word,  keeping  his  thoughts  to
himself.
Lila, too, after taking her son to the neighbor, hurried to the factory.
“So did you make up your mind?” Edo asked, a little sulkily.
“I’ll make up my mind when I like,” Lila answered, returning to her old tone
of voice.
“We’re a committee, you have to inform us.”
“Did you circulate the list?”
“Yes.”
“What do the others say?”
“Silence means consent.”
“No,” she said, “silence means they’re shitting in their pants.”
Capone was right, also Nadia and Armando. It was a weak initiative, a forced
effort. Lila worked at cutting the meat furiously, she had a desire to hurt and
be hurt. To jab her hand with the knife, let it slip, now, from the dead flesh to
her own living flesh. To shout, hurl herself at the others, make them all pay for
her  inability  to  find  an  equilibrium.  Ah,  Lina  Cerullo,  you  are  beyond
correction. Why did you make that list? You don’t want to be exploited? You
want to improve your condition and the condition of these people? You’re
convinced that you, and they, starting from here, from what you are now, will
join the victorious march of the proletariat of the whole world? No way. March
to become what? Now and forever workers? Workers who slave from morning
to night but are empowered? Nonsense. Hot air to sweeten the pill of toil. You
know that it’s a terrible condition, it shouldn’t be improved but eliminated,
you’ve known it since you were a child. Improve, improve yourself? You, for
example, are you improved, have you become like Nadia or Isabella? Is your
brother  improved,  has  he  become  like  Armando?  And  your  son,  is  he  like
Marco? No, we remain us and they are they. So why don’t you resign yourself?
Blame the mind that can’t settle down, that is constantly seeking a way to
function. Designing shoes. Getting busy setting up a shoe factory. Rewriting
Nino’s articles, tormenting him until he did as you said. Using for your own
purposes the installments from Zurich, with Enzo. And now demonstrating to
Nadia that if she is making the revolution, you are even more. The mind, ah
yes, the evil is there, it’s the mind’s discontent that causes the body to get sick.
I’ve had it with myself, with everything. I’ve even had it with Gennaro: his fate,
if all goes well, is to end up in a place like this, crawling to some boss for
another five lire. So? So, Cerullo, take up your responsibilities and do what you
have always had in mind: frighten Soccavo, eliminate his habit of fucking the
workers in the drying room. Show the student with the wolf face what you’ve
prepared. That summer on Ischia. The drinks, the house in Forio, the luxurious
bed where I was with Nino. The money came from this place, from this evil
smell, from these days spent in disgust, from this poorly paid labor. What did I
cut, here? A revolting yellowish pulp spurted out. The world turns but, luckily,
if it falls it breaks.
Right before the lunch break she made up her mind, she said to Edo: I’m
going. But she didn’t have time to take off her apron, the owner’s secretary
appeared in the gutting room to tell her: “Dottor Soccavo wants you urgently
in the office.”
Lila thought that some spy had told Bruno what was coming. She stopped
work, took the sheet of demands from the closet and went up. She knocked on
the door of the office, and went in. Bruno was not alone in the room. Sitting in
a chair, cigarette in his mouth, was Michele Solara.
44.
She had always known that Michele would sooner or later reappear in her
life, but finding him in Bruno’s office frightened her like the spirits in the dark
corners of the house of her childhood. What is he doing here, I have to get out
of  here.  But  Solara,  seeing  her,  stood  up,  spread  his  arms  wide,  seemed
genuinely moved. He said in Italian: Lina, what a pleasure, how happy I am. He
wanted to embrace her, and would have if she hadn’t stopped him with an
unconscious gesture of revulsion. Michele stood for some instants with his
arms  outstretched,  therefore,  in  confusion,  with  one  hand  he  caressed  his
cheekbone, his neck, with the other he pointed to Lila, this time speaking in an
artificial tone: “But really, I can’t believe it: right in the middle of the salamis,
you were hiding Signora Carracci?”
Lila turned to Bruno abruptly: “I’ll come back later.”
“Sit down,” he said, darkly.
“I prefer to stand.”
“Sit, you’ll get tired.”
She shook her head, remained standing, and Michele gave Bruno a smile of
understanding: “She’s made like that, resign yourself, she never obeys.”
To Lila it seemed that Solara’s voice had more power than in the past, he
stressed the end of every word as if he had been practicing his pronunciation.
Maybe to save her strength, maybe just to contradict him, she changed her
mind and sat down. Michele also changed position, but so that he was turned
completely toward her, as if Bruno were no longer in the room. He observed
her  carefully,  affectionately,  and  said,  in  a  tone  of  regret:  your  hands  are
ruined, too bad, as a girl you had such nice ones. Then he began to talk about
the shop in Piazza dei Martiri in the manner of one imparting information, as if
Lila  were  still  his  employee  and  they  were  having  a  work  meeting.  He
mentioned new shelves, new light fixtures, and how he had had the bathroom
door that opened onto the courtyard walled up again. Lila remembered that
door and said softly, in dialect: “I don’t give a fuck about your shop.”
“You mean our: we invented it together.”
“Together with you I never invented anything.”
Michele smiled again, shaking his head in a sign of mild dissent. Those who
put in the money, he said, do and undo just the way those who work with their
hands and their head do. Money invents scenarios, situations, people’s lives.
You don’t know how many people I can make happy or ruin just by signing a
check. And then he began chatting again, placidly; he seemed eager to tell her
the latest news, as if they were two friends catching up. He began with Alfonso,
who had done his job in Piazza dei Martiri well and now earned enough to start
a family. But he had no wish to marry, he preferred to keep poor Marisa in the
condition of fiancée for life and continued to do as he liked. So he, as his
employer, had encouraged him, a regular life is good for one’s employees, and
had  offered  to  pay  for  the  wedding  celebration;  thus,  finally,  in  June  the
marriage would take place. You see, he said, if you had continued to work for
me, rather than Alfonso, I would have given you everything you asked for, you
would have been a queen. Then, without giving her time to answer, he tapped
the ashes of his cigarette into an old bronze ashtray and announced that he,
too, was getting married, also in June, and to Gigliola, naturally, the great love
of his life. Too bad I can’t invite you, he complained, I would have liked to, but I
don’t want to embarrass your husband. And he began to talk about Stefano,
Ada, and their child, first saying nice things about all three, then pointing out
that the two grocery stores weren’t doing as well as they used to. As long as his
father’s money lasted, he explained, Carracci kept afloat, but commerce is a
rough sea now, Stefano’s been shipping water for quite some time, he can’t
manage things anymore. Competition, he said, had increased, new stores were
constantly opening. Marcello himself, for example, had got it into his head to
expand the late Don Carlo’s old store and transform it into one of those places
where you can get anything, from soap to light bulbs, mortadella, and candy.
And he had done it, the business was booming, it was called Everything for
Everyone.
“You’re saying that you and your brother have managed to ruin Stefano,
too?”
“What do you mean ruin, Lina, we do our job and that’s all, in fact, when we
can help our friends we help them happily. Guess who Marcello has working in
the new store?”
“I don’t know.”
“Your brother.”
“You’ve reduced Rino to being your clerk?”
“Well, you abandoned him, and that fellow is carrying all of them on his
shoulders: your father, your mother, a child, Pinuccia, who’s pregnant again.
What could he do? He turned to Marcello for help and Marcello helped him.
Doesn’t that please you?”
Lila responded coldly:
“No, it doesn’t please me, nothing you do pleases me.”
Michele appeared dissatisfied, and he remembered Bruno: “You see, as I was
telling you, her problem is that she has a bad character.”
Bruno gave an embarrassed smile that was meant to be conspiratorial.
“It’s true.”
“Did she hurt you, too?”
“A little.”
“You know that she was still a child when she held a shoemaker’s knife to
my brother’s throat, and he was twice her size? And not as a joke, it was clear
that she was ready to use it.”
“Seriously?”
“Yes. That girl has courage, she’s determined.”
Lila clenched her fists tightly. She detested the weakness she felt in her
body. The room was undulating, the bodies of the dead objects and the living
people  were  expanding.  She  looked  at  Michele,  who  was  extinguishing  the
cigarette in the ashtray. He was putting too much energy into it, as if he, too, in
spite of his placid tone, were giving vent to an uneasiness. Lila stared at his
fingers, which went on squashing the butt, the nails were white. Once, she
thought, he asked me to become his lover. But that’s not what he really wants,
there’s something else, something that doesn’t have to do with sex and that
not even he can explain. He’s obsessed, it’s like a superstition. Maybe he thinks
that I have a power and that that power is indispensable to him. He wants it
but he can’t get it, and it makes him suffer, it’s a thing he can’t take from me by
force. Yes, maybe that’s it. Otherwise he would have crushed me by now. But
why me? What has he recognized in me that’s useful to him? I mustn’t stay
here, under his eyes, I mustn’t listen to him, what he sees and what he wants
scares me. Lila said to Soccavo: “I’ve got something to leave for you and then
I’ll go.”
She got up, ready to give him the list of demands, a gesture that seemed to
her increasingly pointless and yet necessary. She wished to place the piece of
paper on the table, next to the ashtray, and leave that room. But Michele’s
voice stopped her. Now it was definitely affectionate, almost caressing, as if he
had  intuited  that  she  was  trying  to  get  away  from  him  and  wanted  to  do
everything  possible  to  charm  her  and  keep  her.  He  continued  speaking  to
Soccavo: “You see, she really has a bad character. I’m speaking, but she doesn’t
give a damn, she pulls out a piece of paper, says she wants to leave. But you
forgive her, because she has many good qualities that make up for her bad
character. You think you hired a worker? It’s not true. This woman is much,
much more. If you let her, she’ll change shit into gold for you, she’s capable of
reorganizing this whole enterprise, taking it to levels you can’t even imagine.
Why? Because she has the type of mind that normally no woman has but also
that not even we men have. I’ve had an eye on her since she was a child and it’s
true. She designed shoes that I still sell today in Naples and outside, and I make
a  lot  of  money.  And  she  renovated  a  shop  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri  with  such
imagination that it became a salon for the rich people from Via Chiaia, from
Posillipo, from the Vomero. And there are many—very many—other things she
could do. But she has a crazy streak, she thinks she can always do what she
wants. Come, go, fix, break. You think I fired her? No, one day, as if it were
nothing, she didn’t come to work. Just like that, vanished. And if you catch her
again, she’ll slip away again, she’s an eel. This is her problem: even though
she’s extremely intelligent, she can’t understand what she can do and what she
can’t. That’s because she hasn’t yet found a real man. A real man puts the
woman in her place. She’s not capable of cooking? She learns. The house is
dirty? She cleans it. A real man can make a woman do everything. For example:
I met a woman a while ago who didn’t know how to whistle. Well, we were
together for two hours only—hours of fire—and afterward I said to her: Now
whistle.  She—you  won’t  believe  it—whistled.  If  you  know  how  to  train  a
woman, good. If you don’t know how to train her, forget about her, you’ll get
hurt.” He uttered these last words in a very serious tone, as if they summed up
an  irrefutable  commandment.  But  even  as  he  was  speaking,  he  must  have
realized that he hadn’t been able, and was still unable, to respect his own law.
So suddenly his expression changed, his voice changed, he felt an urgent need
to humiliate her. He turned toward Lila with a jolt of impatience and said
emphatically,  in  a  crescendo  of  obscenities  in  dialect:  “But  with  her  it’s
difficult, it’s not so easy to kiss her off. And yet you see what she looks like, she
has small eyes, small tits, a small ass, she’s just a broomstick. With someone
like that what can you do, you can’t even get it up. But an instant is enough, a
single instant: you look at her and you want to fuck her.”
It was at that point that Lila felt a violent bump inside her head, as if her
heart,  instead  of  hammering  in  her  throat,  had  exploded  in  her  skull.  She
yelled an insult at him no less obscene than the words he had uttered, she
grabbed from the desk the bronze ashtray, spilling out butts and ashes, and
tried to hit him. But the gesture, in spite of her fury, was slow, powerless. And
even Bruno’s voice—Lina, please, what are you doing—passed through her slowly.
So maybe for that reason Solara stopped her easily and easily took away the
ashtray, saying to her angrily: “You think you work for Dottor Soccavo? You
think  I’m  no  one  here?  You  are  mistaken.  Dottor  Soccavo  has  been  in  my
mother’s red book for quite some time, and that book is a lot more important
than Mao’s little book. So you don’t work for him, you work for me, you work
for me and only me. And so far I’ve let you, I wanted to see what the fuck you
were driving at, you and that shit you sleep with. But from now on remember
that I have my eyes on you and if I need you, you better come running, got
that?”
Only then Bruno jumped to his feet nervously and exclaimed: “Leave her,
Michè, you’re going too far.”
Solara let go of Lila’s wrist, then he muttered, addressing Soccavo, again in
Italian: “You’re right, sorry. But Signora Carracci has this ability: one way or
another she always compels you to go too far.”
Lina repressed her fury, she rubbed her wrist carefully, with the tip of her
finger she wiped off some ash that had fallen on it. Then she unfolded the piece
of paper with the demands, she placed it in front of Bruno, and as she was
going to the door she turned to Solara, saying: “I’ve known how to whistle
since I was five years old.”
45.
When she came back down, her face very pale, Edo asked her how it went,
but Lila didn’t answer, she pushed him away with one hand and shut herself in
the bathroom. She was afraid that Bruno would call her back, she was afraid of
being forced to have a confrontation in Michele’s presence, she was afraid of
the unaccustomed fragility of her body—she couldn’t get used to it. From the
little window she spied on the courtyard and drew a sigh of relief when she
saw Michele, tall, in a black leather jacket and dark pants, going bald at the
temples, his handsome face carefully shaved, walk nervously to his car, and
leave. Then she returned to the gutting room and Edo asked her again:
“So?”
“I did it. But from now on the rest of you have to take care of it.”
“In what sense?”
She couldn’t answer: Bruno’s secretary had appeared, breathless, the owner
wanted her right away. She went like that saint who, although she still has her
head on her shoulders, is carrying it in her hands, as if it had already been cut
off. Bruno, as soon as he saw her, almost screamed:
“You people want to have coffee in bed in the morning? What is this latest
thing, Lina? Do you have any idea? Sit down and explain. I can’t believe it.”
Lila  explained  to  him,  demand  by  demand,  in  the  tone  she  used  with
Gennaro when he refused to understand. She said emphatically that he had
better take that piece of paper seriously and deal with the various points in a
constructive spirit, because if he behaved unreasonably, the office of the labor
inspector would soon come down on him. Finally she asked him what sort of
trouble he’d got into, to end up in the hands of dangerous people like the
Solaras.  At  that  point  Bruno  lost  control  completely.  His  red  complexion
turned purple, his eyes grew bloodshot, he yelled that he would ruin her, that a
few extra lire for the four dickheads she had set against him would be enough
to settle everything. He shouted that for years his father had been bribing the
inspector’s office and she was dreaming if she thought he was afraid of an
inspection. He cried that the Solaras would eliminate her desire to be a union
member, and finally, in a choked voice, he said: Out, get out immediately, out.
Lila went to the door. On the threshold she said:
“This is the last time you’ll see me. I’m done working here, starting now.”
At those words Soccavo abruptly returned to himself. He had an expression
of alarm, he must have promised Michele that he wouldn’t fire her. He said:
“Now you’re insulted? Now you’re being difficult? What do you say, come here,
let’s discuss it, I’ll decide if I should fire you or not. Bitch, I said come here.”
For a fraction of a second Ischia came to mind, the morning we waited for
Nino and his rich friend, the boy who had a house in Forio, who was always so
polite and patient, to arrive. She went out and closed the door behind her.
Immediately afterward she began to tremble violently, she was covered with
sweat. She didn’t go to the gutting room, she didn’t say goodbye to Edo and
Teresa, she passed by Filippo, who looked at her in bewilderment and called to
her:  Cerù,  where  are  you  going,  come  back  inside.  But  she  ran  along  the
unpaved road, took the first bus for the Marina, reached the sea. She walked
for a long time. There was a cold wind, and she went up to the Vomero in the
funicular, walked through Piazza Vanvitelli, along Via Scarlatti, Via Cimarosa,
took the funicular again to go down. It was late when she realized that she had
forgotten about Gennaro. She got home at nine, and asked Enzo and Pasquale,
who were anxiously questioning her to find out what had happened to her, to
come and look for me in the neighborhood.
And now here we are, in the middle of the night, in this bare room in San
Giovanni a Teduccio. Gennaro is sleeping, Lila talks on and on in a low voice,
Enzo  and  Pasquale  are  waiting  in  the  kitchen.  I  feel  like  the  knight  in  an
ancient  romance  as,  wrapped  in  his  shining  armor,  after  performing  a
thousand astonishing feats throughout the world, he meets a ragged, starving
herdsman,  who,  never  leaving  his  pasture,  subdues  and  controls  horrible
beasts with his bare hands, and with prodigious courage.
46.
I was a tranquil listener, and I let her talk. Some moments of the story,
especially when the expression of Lila’s face and the pace of her sentences
underwent a sudden, painful nervous contraction, disturbed me deeply. I felt a
powerful sense of guilt, I thought: this is the life that could have been mine,
and if it isn’t it’s partly thanks to her. Sometimes I almost hugged her, more
often  I  wanted  to  ask  questions,  comment.  But  in  general  I  held  back,  I
interrupted two or three times at most.
For example, I certainly interrupted when she talked about Professor Galiani
and her children. I would have liked her to explain better what the professor
had said, what precise words she had used, if my name had ever come up with
Nadia and Armando. But I realized in time the pettiness of the questions and
restrained myself, even though a part of me considered the curiosity legitimate
—they were acquaintances of mine, after all, who were important to me.
“Before I go to Florence for good, I should pay a visit to Professor Galiani.
Maybe you’d come with me, do you want to?” and I added: “My relationship
with her cooled a little, after Ischia, she blamed me for Nino’s leaving Nadia.”
Since Lila looked at me as if she didn’t see me, I said again: “The Galianis are
good  people,  a  little  stuck  up,  but  this  business  of  the  murmur  should  be
checked.”
This time she reacted.
“The murmur is there.”
“All right,” I said, “but even Armando said you’d need a cardiologist.”
She replied:
“He heard it, anyway.”
But I felt involved above all when it came to sexual matters. When she told
me about the drying room, I almost said: an old intellectual jumped on me, in
Turin, and in Milan a Venezuelan painter I’d known for only a few hours came
to my room to get in bed as if it were a favor I owed him. Yet I held back, even
with that. What sense was there in speaking of my affairs at that moment? And
then really what could I have told her that had any resemblance to what she
was telling me?
That last question presented itself clearly when, from a simple recitation of
the facts—years before, when she told me about her wedding night, we had
talked only of the most brutal facts—Lila proceeded to talk generally about her
sexuality. It was a subject completely new for us. The coarse language of the
environment we came from was useful for attack or self-defense, but, precisely
because it was the language of violence, it hindered, rather than encouraged,
intimate confidences. So I was embarrassed, I stared at the floor, when she
said, in the crude vocabulary of the neighborhood, that fucking had never
given her the pleasure she had expected as a girl, that in fact she had almost
never felt anything, that after Stefano, after Nino, to do it really annoyed her,
so that she had been unable to accept inside herself even a man as gentle as
Enzo. Not only that: using an even more brutal vocabulary, she added that
sometimes  out  of  necessity,  sometimes  out  of  curiosity,  sometimes  out  of
passion, she had done everything that a man could want from a woman, and
that even when she had wanted to conceive a child with Nino, and had become
pregnant, the pleasure you were supposed to feel, particularly at that moment
of great love, had been missing.
Before such frankness I understood that I could not be silent, that I had to let
her feel how close I was, that I had to react to her confidences with equal
confidences.  But  at  the  idea  of  having  to  speak  about  myself—the  dialect
disgusted me, and although I passed for an author of racy pages, the Italian I
had  acquired  seemed  to  me  too  precious  for  the  sticky  material  of  sexual
experiences—my uneasiness grew, I forgot how difficult her confession had
been, that every word, however vulgar, was set in the weariness in her face, in
the trembling of her hands, and I was brief.
“For me it’s not like that,” I said.
I wasn’t lying, and yet it wasn’t the truth. The truth was more complicated
and to give it a form I would have needed practiced words. I would have had to
explain that, in the time of Antonio, rubbing against him, letting him touch me
had always been very pleasurable, and that I still desired that pleasure. I would
have had to admit that being penetrated had disappointed me, too, that the
experience  was  spoiled  by  the  sense  of  guilt,  by  the  discomfort  of  the
conditions, by the fear of being caught, by the haste arising from that, by the
terror of getting pregnant. But I would have had to add that Franco—the little I
knew of sex was largely from him—before entering me and afterward let me
rub against one of his legs, against his stomach, and that this was nice and
sometimes made the penetration nice, too. As a result, I would have had to tell
her, I was now waiting for marriage, Pietro was a very gentle man, I hoped that
in the tranquility and the legitimacy of marriage I would have the time and the
comfort to discover the pleasure of coitus. There, if I had expressed myself like
that, I would have been honest. But the two of us, at nearly twenty-five, did not
have a tradition of such articulate confidences. There had been only small
general allusions when she was engaged to Stefano and I was with Antonio,
bashful  phrases,  hints.  As  for  Donato  Sarratore,  as  for  Franco,  I  had  never
talked about either one. So I kept to those few words—For me it’s not like that
—which must have sounded to her as if I were saying: Maybe you’re not normal.
And in fact she looked at me in bewilderment, and said as if to protect herself:
“In the book you wrote something else.”
So she had read it. I murmured defensively: “I don’t even know anymore
what ended up in there.”
“Dirty stuff ended up in there,” she said, “stuff that men don’t want to hear
and women know but are afraid to say. But now what—are you hiding?”
She used more or less those words, certainly she said dirty. She, too, then,
cited the risqué pages and did it like Gigliola, who had used the word dirt. I
expected that she would offer an evaluation of the book as a whole, but she
didn’t, she used it only as a bridge to go back and repeat what she called
several  times,  insistently,  the  bother  of  fucking.  That  is  in  your  novel,  she
exclaimed, and if you told it you know it, it’s pointless for you to say: For me
it’s not like that. And I mumbled Yes, maybe it’s true, but I don’t know. And
while she with a tortured lack of shame went on with her confidences—the
great excitement, the lack of satisfaction, the sense of disgust—I thought of
Nino, and the questions I had so often turned over and over reappeared. Was
that long night full of tales a good moment to tell her I had seen him? Should I
warn her that for Gennaro she couldn’t count on Nino, that he already had
another  child,  that  he  left  children  behind  him  heedlessly?  Should  I  take
advantage of that moment, of those admissions of his, to let her know that in
Milan he had said an unpleasant thing about her: Lila is made badly even when it
comes to sex? Should I go so far as to tell her that in those agitated confidences
of hers, even in that way of reading the dirty pages of my book, now, while she
was speaking I seemed to find confirmation that Nino was, in essence, right?
What  in  fact  had  Sarratore’s  son  intended  if  not  what  she  herself  was
admitting? Had he realized that for Lila being penetrated was only a duty, that
she  couldn’t  enjoy  the  union?  He,  I  said  to  myself,  is  experienced.  He  has
known many women, he knows what good female sexual behavior is and so he
recognizes when it’s bad. To be made badly when it comes to sex means, evidently,
not to be able to feel pleasure in the male’s thrusting; it means twisting with
desire and rubbing yourself to quiet that desire, it means grabbing his hands
and placing them against your sex as I sometimes did with Franco, ignoring his
annoyance, the boredom of the one who has already had his orgasm and now
would like to go to sleep. My uneasiness increased, I thought: I wrote that in my
novel, is that what Gigliola and Lila recognized, was that what Nino recognized,
perhaps, and the reason he wanted to talk about it? I let everything go and
whispered somewhat randomly: “I’m sorry.”
“What?”
“That your pregnancy was without joy.”
She responded with a flash of sarcasm: “Imagine how I felt.”
My last interruption came when it had begun to get light, and she had just
finished telling me about the encounter with Michele. I said: That’s enough,
calm down, take your temperature. It was 101. I hugged her tight, I whispered:
now I’ll take care of you, and until you’re better we’ll stay together, and if I
have  to  go  to  Florence  you  and  the  child  will  come  with  me.  She  refused
energetically, she made the final confession of that night. She said she had
been wrong to follow Enzo to San Giovanni a Teduccio, she wanted to go back
to the neighborhood.
“To the neighborhood?”
“Yes.”
“You’re crazy.”
“As soon as I feel better I’ll do it.”
I rebuked her, I told her it was a thought induced by the fever, that the
neighborhood would exhaust her, that to set foot there was stupid.
“I can’t wait to leave,” I exclaimed.
“You’re strong,” she answered, to my astonishment. “I have never been. The
better and truer you feel, the farther away you go. If I merely pass through the
tunnel of the stradone, I’m scared. Remember when we tried to get to the sea
but it started raining? Which of us wanted to keep going and which of us made
an about-face, you or me?”
“I don’t remember. But, anyway, don’t go back to the neighborhood.”
I tried in vain to make her change her mind. We discussed it for a long time.
“Go,” she said finally, “talk to the two of them, they’ve been waiting for
hours. They haven’t closed their eyes and they have to go to work.”
“What shall I tell them?”
“Whatever you want.”
I pulled the covers up, I also covered Gennaro, who had been tossing in his
sleep all night. I realized that Lila was already falling asleep. I whispered: “I’ll
be back soon.”
She said: “Remember what you promised.”
“What?”
“You’ve already forgotten? If something happens to me, you’ve got to take
Gennaro.”
“Nothing will happen to you.”
As  I  went  out  of  the  room  Lila  started  in  her  half-sleep,  she  whispered:
“Watch me until I fall asleep. Watch me always, even when you leave Naples.
That way I’ll know that you see me and I’m at peace.”
47.
In the time that passed between that night and the day of my wedding—I
was married on May 17, 1969, in Florence, and, after a honeymoon of just three
days in Venice, enthusiastically began my life as a wife—I tried to do all I could
for Lila. At first, in fact, I thought simply that I would help her until she got
over the flu. I had things to do about the house in Florence, I had a lot of
engagements  because  of  the  book—the  telephone  rang  constantly,  and  my
mother grumbled that she had given the number to half the neighborhood but
no one called her, to have that thingamajig in the house, she said, is just a
bother,  since  the  calls  were  almost  always  for  me—I  wrote  notes  for
hypothetical new novels, I tried to fill the gaps in my literary and political
education. But my friend’s general state of weakness soon led me to neglect my
own affairs and occupy myself with her. My mother realized right away that
we had resumed our friendship: she found it shameful, she flew into a rage, she
was full of insults for both of us. She continued to believe that she could tell me
what to do and what not to, she limped after me, criticizing me. Sometimes she
seemed determined to insert herself into my body, simply to keep me from
being my own master. What do you have in common with her anymore, she
insisted, think of what you are and of what she is, isn’t that disgusting book
you  wrote  enough,  you  want  to  go  on  being  friends  with  a  whore?  But  I
behaved as if I were deaf. I saw Lila every day and from the moment I left her
sleeping in her room and went to face the two men who had waited all night in
the kitchen I devoted myself to reorganizing her life.
I told Enzo and Pasquale that Lila was ill, she couldn’t work at the Soccavo
factory anymore, she had quit. With Enzo I didn’t have to waste words, he had
understood for a while that she couldn’t go on at the factory, that she had
gotten  into  a  difficult  situation,  that  something  inside  her  was  giving  in.
Pasquale,  instead,  driving  back  to  the  neighborhood  on  the  early-morning
streets, still free of traffic, objected. Let’s not overdo it, he said, it’s true that
Lila has a hard life, but that’s what happens to all the exploited of the world.
Then, following a tendency he had had since he was a boy, he went on to speak
about the peasants of the south, the workers of the north, the populations of
Latin  America,  of  northeastern  Brazil,  of  Africa,  about  the  Negroes,  the
Vietnamese, American imperialism. I soon stopped him, saying: Pasquale, if
Lina goes on as she has she’ll die. He wouldn’t concede, he continued to object,
and not because he didn’t care about Lila but because the struggle at Soccavo
seemed to him important, he considered our friend’s role crucial, and deep
down he was convinced that all those stories about a little flu came not so
much from her as from me, a bourgeois intellectual more worried about a
slight fever than about the nasty political consequences of a workers’ defeat.
Since he couldn’t make up his mind to say these things to me explicitly but
spoke in sentence fragments, I summed it up for him with soothing clarity, to
show him I had understood. That made him even more anxious and as he left
me at the gate he said: I have to go to work now, Lenù, but we’ll talk about it
again. As soon as I returned to the house in San Giovanni a Teduccio I took
Enzo aside and said: Keep Pasquale away from Lina if you love her, she mustn’t
hear any talk of the factory.
In that period I always carried in my purse a book and a notebook: I read on
the bus or when Lila was sleeping. Sometimes I discovered her with her eyes
open, staring at me, maybe she was peeking to see what I was reading, but she
never  asked  me  the  title  of  the  book,  and  when  I  tried  to  read  her  some
passages—from scenes at the Upton Inn, I remember—she closed her eyes as if
I were boring her. The fever passed in a few days, but the cough didn’t, so I
forced her to stay in bed. I cleaned the house, I cooked, I took care of Gennaro.
Maybe because he was already big, somewhat aggressive, willful, he didn’t have
the defenseless charm of Mirko, Nino’s other child. But sometimes in the midst
of violent games he would turn unexpectedly sad, and fall asleep on the floor;
that softened me, and I grew fond of him, and when that became clear to him
he attached himself to me, keeping me from doing chores or reading.
Meanwhile I tried to get a better understanding of Lila’s situation. Did she
have money? No. I lent her some and she accepted it after swearing endlessly
that she would pay me back. How much did Bruno owe her? Two months’
salary. And severance pay? She didn’t know. What was Enzo’s job, how much
did  he  earn?  No  idea.  And  that  correspondence  course  in  Zurich—what
concrete possibilities did it offer? Who knows. She coughed constantly, she had
pains in her chest, sweats, a vise in her throat, her heart would suddenly go
crazy. I wrote down punctiliously all the symptoms and tried to convince her
that another medical examination was necessary, more thorough than the one
Armando had done. She didn’t say yes but she didn’t oppose it. One evening
before Enzo returned, Pasquale looked in, he said very politely that he, his
comrades on the committee, and some workers at the Soccavo factory wanted
to know how she was. I replied that she wasn’t well, she needed rest, but he
asked to see her just the same, to say hello. I left him in the kitchen, I went to
Lila, I advised her not to see him. She made a face that meant: I’ll do as you
want. I was moved by the fact that she gave in to me—she who had always
commanded, done and undone—without arguing.
48.
At home that same night I made a long call to Pietro, telling him in detail all
Lila’s  troubles  and  how  important  it  was  to  me  to  help  her.  He  listened
patiently. At a certain point he even exhibited a spirit of collaboration: he
remembered a young Pisan Greek scholar who was obsessed with computers
and imagined that they would revolutionize philology. I was touched by the
fact that, although he was a person who was always buried in his work, on this
occasion, for love of me, he made an effort to be useful.
“Find him,” I begged him, “tell him about Enzo, you never know, maybe
some job prospects might turn up.”
He  promised  he  would  and  added  that,  if  he  remembered  correctly,
Mariarosa had had a brief romance with a young Neapolitan lawyer: maybe he
could find him and ask if he could help.
“To do what?”
“To get your friend’s money back.”
I was excited.
“Call Mariarosa.”
“All right.”
I insisted: “Don’t just promise, call her, please.”
He was silent for a moment, then he said: “Just then you sounded like my
mother.”
“In what sense?”
“You sounded like her when something is very important to her.”
“I’m very different, unfortunately.”
He was silent again.
“You’re different, fortunately. But in these types of things there’s no one like
her. Tell her about that girl and you’ll see, she’ll help you.”
I telephoned Adele. I did it with some embarrassment, which I overcame by
reminding myself of all the times I had seen her at work, for my book, in the
search for the apartment in Florence. She was a woman who liked to be busy. If
she  needed  something,  she  picked  up  the  telephone  and,  link  by  link,  put
together the chain that led to her goal. She knew how to ask in such a way that
saying no was impossible. And she crossed ideological borders confidently, she
respected  no  hierarchies,  she  tracked  down  cleaning  women,  bureaucrats,
industrialists,  intellectuals,  ministers,  and  she  addressed  all  with  cordial
detachment, as if the favor she was about to ask she was in fact already doing
for them. Amid a thousand awkward apologies for disturbing her, I told Adele
in detail about my friend, and she became curious, interested, angry. At the
end she said: “Let me think.”
“Of course.”
“Meanwhile, can I give you some advice?”
“Of course.”
“Don’t be timid. You’re a writer, use your role, test it, make something of it.
These are decisive times, everything is turning upside down. Participate, be
present. And begin with the scum in your area, put their backs to the wall.”
“How?”
“By writing. Frighten Soccavo to death, and others like him. Promise you’ll
do it?”
“I’ll try.”
She gave me the name of an editor at l’Unità.
49.
The telephone call to Pietro and, especially, the one to my mother-in-law
released a feeling that until that moment I had kept at bay, that in fact I had
repressed,  but  that  was  alive  and  ready  to  advance.  It  had  to  do  with  my
changed status. It was likely that the Airotas, especially Guido but perhaps
Adele herself, considered me a girl who, although very eager, was far from the
person they would have chosen for their son. It was just as likely that my
origin, my dialectal cadence, my lack of sophistication in everything, had put
the breadth of their views to a hard test. With just a slight exaggeration I could
hypothesize that even the publication of my book was part of an emergency
plan intended to make me presentable in their world. But the fact remained,
incontrovertible, that they had accepted me, that I was about to marry Pietro,
with their consent, that I was about to enter a protective family, a sort of well-
fortified castle from which I could proceed without fear or to which I could
retreat  if  I  were  in  danger.  So  it  was  urgent  that  I  get  used  to  that  new
membership, and above all I had to be conscious of it. I was no longer a small
match-seller  almost  down  to  the  last  match;  I  had  won  for  myself  a  large
supply of matches. And so—I suddenly understood—I could do for Lila much
more than I had calculated on doing.
It was with this perspective that I had my friend give me the documentation
she had collected against Soccavo. She handed it over passively, without even
asking what I wanted to do with it. I read with increasing absorption. How
many terrible things she had been able to say precisely and effectively. How
many intolerable experiences could be perceived behind the description of the
factory. I turned the pages in my hands for a long time, then suddenly, almost
without coming to a decision, I looked in the telephone book, I called Soccavo. I
subdued my voice to the right tone, I asked for Bruno. He was cordial—What a
pleasure to talk to you—I cold. He said: You’ve done so many great things, Elena, I
saw a picture of you in Roma, bravo, what a wonderful time we had on Ischia. I
answered that it was a pleasure to talk to him, too, but that Ischia was far
away,  and  for  better  and  worse  we  had  all  changed,  that  in  his  case,  for
example,  I  had  heard  some  nasty  rumors  that  I  hoped  were  not  true.  He
understood  immediately  and  protested.  He  spoke  harshly  of  Lila,  of  her
ungratefulness, of the trouble she had caused him. I changed my tone, I said
that I believed Lila more than him. Take a pencil and paper, I said, write down
my number, got it? Now give instructions for her to be paid down to the last
lira you owe her, and let me know when I can come and get the money: I
wouldn’t like to see your picture in the papers, too.
I hung up before he could object, feeling proud of myself. I hadn’t shown the
least emotion, I had been curt, a few remarks in Italian, polite first, then aloof. I
hoped that Pietro was right: was I really acquiring Adele’s tone, was I learning,
without  realizing  it,  her  way  of  being  in  the  world?  I  decided  to  find  out
whether I was capable, if I wanted, of carrying out the threat I had ended the
phone call with. Agitated—as I had not been when I called Bruno, still the
boring  boy  who  had  tried  to  kiss  me  on  the  beach  of  Citara—I  dialed  the
number of the editorial offices of l’Unità. While the telephone rang, I hoped
that  the  voice  of  my  mother  yelling  at  Elisa  in  dialect  in  the  background
wouldn’t be heard. My name is Elena Greco, I said to the switchboard operator,
and I didn’t have time to explain what I wanted before the woman exclaimed:
Elena Greco the writer? She had read my book, and was full of compliments. I
thanked her, I felt happy, strong, I explained, unnecessarily, that I had in mind
an article about a factory on the outskirts, and I gave the name of the editor
Adele had suggested. The operator congratulated me again, then she resumed
a professional tone. Hold on, she said. A moment later a very hoarse male voice
asked me in a teasing tone since when practitioners of literature had been
willing to dirty their pens on the subject of piece work, shifts, and overtime,
very boring subjects that young, successful novelists in particular stayed away
from.
“What’s the angle?” he asked. “Construction, longshoremen, miners?”
“It’s a sausage factory,” I said. “Not a big deal.”
The man continued to make fun of me: “You don’t have to apologize, it’s
fine. If Elena Greco, to whom this newspaper devoted no less than half a page
of profuse praise, decides to write about sausages, can we poor editors possibly
say: that it doesn’t interest us? Are thirty lines enough? Too few? Let’s be
generous, make it sixty. When you’ve finished, will you bring it to me in person
or dictate it?”
I began working on the article right away. I had to squeeze out of Lila’s pages
my sixty lines, and for love of her I wanted to do a good job. But I had no
experience of newspaper writing, apart from when, at the age of fifteen, I had
tried to write about the conflict with the religion teacher for Nino’s journal:
with terrible results. I don’t know, maybe it was that memory that complicated
things.  Or  maybe  it  was  the  editor’s  sarcastic  tone  that  rang  in  my  ears,
especially when, at the end of the call, he asked me to give his best to my
mother-in-law. Certainly I took a lot of time, I wrote and rewrote stubbornly.
But even when the article seemed to be finished I wasn’t satisfied and I didn’t
take it to the newspaper. I have to talk to Lila first, I said to myself, it’s a thing
that should be decided together; I’ll turn it in tomorrow.
The  next  day  I  went  to  see  Lila;  she  seemed  particularly  unwell.  She
complained that when I wasn’t there certain presences took advantage of my
absence  and  emerged  from  objects  to  bother  her  and  Gennaro.  Then  she
realized  that  I  was  alarmed  and,  in  a  tone  of  amusement,  said  it  was  all
nonsense, she just wanted me to be with her more. We talked a lot, I soothed
her, but I didn’t give her the article to read. What held me back was the idea
that if l’Unità rejected the piece I would be forced to tell her that they hadn’t
found it good, and I would feel humiliated. It took a phone call from Adele that
night to give me a solid dose of optimism and make up my mind. She had
consulted her husband and also Mariarosa. She had moved half the world in a
few hours: luminaries of medicine, socialist professors who knew about the
union, a Christian Democrat whom she called a bit foolish but a good person
and an expert in workers’ rights. The result was that I had an appointment the
next day with the best cardiologist in Naples—a friend of friends, I wouldn’t
have to pay—and that the labor inspector would immediately pay a visit to the
Soccavo  factory,  and  that  to  get  Lila’s  money  I  could  go  to  that  friend  of
Mariarosa’s whom Pietro had mentioned, a young socialist lawyer who had an
office in Piazza Nicola Amore and had already been informed.
“Happy?”
“Yes.”
“Did you write your article?”
“Yes.”
“You see? I was sure you wouldn’t do it.”
“In fact it’s ready, I’ll take it to l’Unità tomorrow.”
“Good. I run the risk of underestimating you.”
“It’s a risk?”
“Underestimating always is. How’s it going with that poor little creature my
son?”
50.
From then on everything became fluid, almost as if I possessed the art of
making events flow like water from a spring. Even Pietro had worked for Lila.
His colleague the Greek scholar turned out to be extremely talkative but useful
just the same: he knew someone in Bologna who really was a computer expert
—the reliable source of his philological fantasies—and he had given him the
number of an acquaintance in Naples, judged to be equally reliable. He gave me
the name, address, and telephone number of the Neapolitan, and I thanked him
warmly, commenting with affectionate irony on his forced entrepreneurship—
I even sent him a kiss over the phone.
I went to see Lila immediately. She had a cavernous cough, her face was
strained and pale, her gaze excessively watchful. But I was bringing good news
and  was  happy.  I  shook  her,  hugged  her,  held  both  her  hands  tight,  and
meanwhile told her about the phone call I had made to Bruno, read her the
article  I  had  written,  enumerated  the  results  of  the  painstaking  efforts  of
Pietro,  of  my  mother-in-law,  of  my  sister-in-law.  She  listened  as  if  I  were
speaking from far away—from another world into which I had ventured—and
could  hear  clearly  only  half  the  things  I  was  saying.  Besides,  Gennaro  was
constantly tugging on her to play with him, and, as I spoke, she was attending
to him, but without warmth. I felt content just the same. In the past Lila had
opened  the  miraculous  drawer  of  the  grocery  store  and  had  bought  me
everything, especially books. Now I opened my drawers and paid her back,
hoping that she would feel safe, as I now did.
“So,” I asked her finally, “tomorrow morning you’ll go to the cardiologist?”
She  reacted  to  my  question  in  an  incongruous  way,  saying  with  a  small
laugh:  “Nadia  won’t  like  this  way  of  doing  things.  And  her  brother  won’t,
either.”
“What way, I don’t understand.”
“Nothing.”
“Lila,” I said, “please, what does Nadia have to do with it, don’t give her
more importance than she already gives herself. And forget Armando, he’s
always been superficial.”
I surprised myself with those judgments, after all I knew very little about
Professor Galiani’s children. And for a few seconds I had the impression that
Lila didn’t recognize me but saw before her a spirit who was exploiting her
weakness. In fact, rather than criticizing Nadia and Armando, I only wanted
her to understand that the hierarchies of power were different, that compared
to the Airotas the Galianis didn’t count, that people like Bruno Soccavo or that
thug Michele counted even less, that in other words she should do as I said and
not worry. But as I was speaking I realized I was in danger of boasting and I
caressed her cheek, saying that, of course, I admired Armando and Nadia’s
political engagement, and then I added, laughing: but trust me. She muttered:
“O.K., we’ll go to the cardiologist.”
I persisted:
“And for Enzo what appointment should I make, what time, what day?”
“Whenever you want, but after five.”
As soon as I got home I went back to the telephone. I called the lawyer, I
explained Lila’s situation in detail. I called the cardiologist, I confirmed the
appointment. I telephoned the computer expert, he worked at the Department
of Public Works: he said that the Zurich courses were useless, but that I could
send Enzo to see him on such and such a day at such an address. I called l’Unità,
the editor said: You’re certainly taking your sweet time—are you bringing me
this article, or are we waiting for Christmas? I called Soccavo’s secretary and
asked her to tell her boss that, since I hadn’t heard from him, my article would
be out soon in l’Unità.
That last phone call provoked an immediate, violent reaction. Soccavo called
me two minutes later and this time he wasn’t friendly; he threatened me. I
answered that, momentarily, he would have the inspector on his back and a
lawyer who would take care of Lila’s interests. Then, that evening, pleasantly
overexcited—I  was  proud  of  fighting  against  injustice,  out  of  affection  and
conviction, in spite of Pasquale and Franco, who thought they could still give
me lessons—I hurried to l’Unità to deliver my article.
The man I had talked to was middle-aged, short, and fat, with small, lively
eyes that permanently sparkled with a benevolent irony. He invited me to sit
down on a dilapidated chair and he read the article carefully.
“And this is sixty lines? To me it seems like a hundred and fifty.”
I reddened, I said softly: “I counted several times, it’s sixty.”
“Yes,  but  written  by  hand  and  in  a  script  that  couldn’t  be  read  with  a
magnifying  glass.  But  the  piece  is  very  good,  Comrade.  Find  a  typewriter
somewhere and cut what you can.”
“Now?”
“And when? For once I’ve got something people will actually look at if I put
it on the page, and you want to make me wait for doomsday?”
51.
What energy I had in those days. We went to the cardiologist, a big-name
professor who had a house and office in Via Crispi. I took great care with my
appearance for the occasion. Although the doctor was from Naples, he was
connected with Adele’s world and I didn’t want to make a bad impression. I
brushed my hair, wore a dress that she had given me, used a subtle perfume
that resembled hers, put on light makeup. I wanted the professor, if he spoke
to my mother-in-law on the telephone, or if by chance they met, to speak well
of  me.  Lila  instead  looked  as  she  did  every  day  at  home,  careless  of  her
appearance.  We  sat  in  a  grand  waiting  room,  with  nineteenth-century
paintings on the walls: a noblewoman in an armchair with a Negro servant in
the background, a portrait of an old lady, and a large, lively hunting scene.
There were two other people waiting, a man and a woman, both old, both with
the tidy, elegant look of prosperity. We waited in silence. Lila, who on the way
had repeatedly praised my appearance, said only, in a low voice: You look like
you came out of one of these paintings—you’re the lady and I’m the maid.
We didn’t wait long. A nurse called us; for no obvious reason, we went ahead
of the patients who were waiting. Now Lila became agitated, she wanted me to
be present at the examination, she swore that alone she would never go in, and
she pushed me forward as if I were the one being examined. The doctor was a
bony man in his sixties, with thick gray hair. He greeted me politely, he knew
everything about me, and chatted for ten minutes as if Lila weren’t there. He
said that his son had also graduated from the Normale, but six years before me.
He noted that his brother was a writer and had a certain reputation, but only
in Naples. He was full of praise for the Airotas, he knew a cousin of Adele’s very
well, a famous physicist. He asked me: “When is the wedding?”
“May 17th.”
“The seventeenth? That’s bad luck, please change the date.”
“It’s not possible.”
Lila was silent the whole time. She paid no attention to the professor, I felt
her curiosity on me, she seemed amazed by my every gesture and word. When,
finally,  the  doctor  turned  to  her,  questioning  her  at  length,  she  answered
unwillingly, in dialect or in an ugly Italian that imitated dialect patterns. Often
I had to interrupt to remind her of symptoms that she had reported to me or to
stress  those  which  she  minimized.  Finally  she  submitted  to  a  thorough
examination  and  exhaustive  tests,  with  a  sullen  expression,  as  if  the
cardiologist  and  I  were  doing  her  a  wrong.  I  looked  at  her  thin  body  in  a
threadbare pale blue slip that was too big for her. Her long neck seemed to be
struggling to hold up her head, the skin was stretched over her bones like
tissue paper that might tear at any moment. I realized that the thumb of her
left hand every so often had a small, reflexive twitch. It was a good half hour
before the professor told her to get dressed. She kept her eyes on him as she
did  so;  now  she  seemed  frightened.  The  cardiologist  went  to  the  desk,  sat
down, and finally announced that everything was in order, he hadn’t found a
murmur.  Signora,  he  said,  you  have  a  perfect  heart.  But  the  effect  of  the
verdict on Lila was apparently dubious, she didn’t seem pleased, in fact she
seemed irritated. It was I who felt relieved, as if it were my heart, and it was I
who showed signs of worry when the professor, again addressing me and not
Lila, as if her lack of reaction had offended him, added, with a frown, that,
however,  given  the  general  state  of  my  friend,  urgent  measures  were
necessary. The problem, he said, isn’t the cough: the signora has a cold, has had
a slight flu, and I’ll give her some cough syrup. The problem, according to him,
was that she was exhausted, run down. Lila had to take better care of herself,
eat regularly, have a tonic treatment, get at least eight hours of sleep a night.
The majority of your friend’s symptoms, he said, will vanish when she regains
her  strength.  In  any  case,  he  concluded,  I  would  advise  a  neurological
examination.
It was the penultimate word that roused Lila. She scowled, leaned forward,
said in Italian: “Are you saying that I have a nervous illness?”
The doctor looked at her in surprise, as if the patient he had just finished
examining had been magically replaced by another person.
“Not at all: I’m only advising an examination.”
“Did I say or do something I shouldn’t have?”
“No, madam, there’s no need to worry. The examination serves only to get a
clear picture of your situation.”
“A relative of mine,” said Lila, “a cousin of my mother’s, was unhappy, she’d
been unhappy her whole life. In the summer, when I was little, I would hear
her through the open window, shouting, laughing. Or I would see her on the
street doing slightly crazy things. But it was unhappiness, and so she never
went to a neurologist, in fact she never went to any doctor.”
“It would have been useful to go.”
“Nervous illnesses are for ladies.”
“Your mother’s cousin isn’t a lady?”
“No.”
“And you?”
“Even less so.”
“Do you feel unhappy?”
“I’m very well.”
The doctor turned to me again, irritably: “Absolute rest. Have her do this
treatment, regularly. If you have some way of taking her to the country, it
would be better.”
Lila burst out laughing, she returned to dialect: “The last time I went to a
doctor he sent me to the beach and it brought me a lot of grief.”
The  professor  pretended  not  to  hear,  he  smiled  at  me  as  if  to  elicit  a
conspiratorial smile, gave me the name of a friend who was a neurologist, and
telephoned himself so that the man would see us as soon as possible. It wasn’t
easy to drag Lila to the new doctor’s office. She said she didn’t have time to
waste, she was already bored enough by the cardiologist, she had to get back to
Gennaro, and above all she didn’t have money to throw away nor did she want
me to throw away mine. I assured her that the examination would be free and
in the end, reluctantly, she gave in.
The neurologist was a small lively man, completely bald, who had an office
in an old building in Toledo and displayed in his waiting room an orderly
collection of philosophy books. He liked to hear himself talk, and he talked so
much that, it seemed to me, he paid more attention to the thread of his own
discourse than to the patient. He examined her and addressed me, he asked her
questions  and  propounded  to  me  his  observations,  taking  no  notice  of  the
responses she gave. In the end, he concluded abstractedly that Lila’s nervous
system was in order, just like her cardiac muscle. But—he said, continuing to
address  me—my  colleague  is  right,  dear  Dottoressa  Greco,  the  body  is
weakened, and as a result both the irascible and the concupiscible passions
have taken advantage of it to get the upper hand over reason: let’s restore
well-being to the body and we’ll restore health to the mind. Then he wrote out
a prescription, in indecipherable marks, but pronouncing aloud the names of
the  medicines,  the  doses.  Then  he  moved  on  to  advice.  He  advised,  for
relaxation,  long  walks,  but  avoiding  the  sea:  better,  he  said,  the  woods  of
Capodimonte or Camaldoli. He advised reading, but only during the day, never
at night. He advised keeping the hands employed, even though a careful glance
at  Lila’s  would  have  been  enough  to  realize  that  they  had  been  too  much
employed. When he began to insist on the neurological benefits of crochet
work, Lila became restless in her chair, and without waiting for the doctor to
finish  speaking,  she  asked  him,  following  the  course  of  her  own  secret
thoughts: “As long as we’re here, could you give me the pills that prevent you
from having children?”
The doctor frowned, and so, I think, did I. The request seemed out of place.
“Are you married?”
“I was, not now.”
“In what sense not now?”
“I’m separated.”
“You’re still married.”
“Well.”
“Have you had children?”
“I have one.”
“One isn’t much.”
“It’s enough for me.”
“In your condition pregnancy would help, there is no better medicine for a
woman.”
“I know women who were destroyed by pregnancy. Better to have the pills.”
“For that problem of yours you’ll have to consult a gynecologist.”
“You only know about nerves, you don’t know about pills?”
The doctor was irritated. He chatted a little more and then, in the doorway,
gave me the address and telephone number of a doctor who worked in a clinic
in Ponte di Tappia. Go to her, he said, as if it were I who had asked for the
contraceptives, and he said goodbye. On the way out the secretary asked us to
pay. The neurologist, I gathered, was outside the chain of favors that Adele had
set in motion. I paid.
Once we were in the street Lila almost shouted, irately: I will not take a
single one of the medicines that shit gave me, since my head is falling off just
the same, I already know it. I answered: I disagree, but do as you like. Then she
was confused, she said quietly: I’m not angry with you, I’m angry with the
doctors, and we walked in the direction of Ponte di Tappia, but without saying
so, as if we were strolling aimlessly, just to stretch our legs. First she was silent,
then  she  imitated  in  annoyance  the  neurologist’s  tone  and  his  babble.  It
seemed to me that her impatience signaled a return of vitality. I asked her: “Is
it going a little better with Enzo?”
“It’s the same as always.”
“Then what do you want with the pills?”
“Do you know about them?”
“Yes.”
“Do you take them?”
“No, but I will as soon as I’m married.”
“You don’t want children?”
“I do, but I have to write another book first.”
“Does your husband know you don’t want them right away?”
“I’ll tell him.”
“Shall we go see this woman and have her give both of us pills?”
“Lila, it’s not candy you can take whenever you like. If you’re not doing
anything with Enzo forget it.”
She  looked  at  me  with  narrowed  eyes,  cracks  in  which  her  pupils  were
scarcely visible: “I’m not doing anything now but later who knows.”
“Seriously?”
“I shouldn’t, in your opinion?”
“Yes, of course.”
At Ponte di Tappia we looked for a phone booth and called the doctor, who
said she could see us right away. On the way to the clinic I made it clear to Lila
that I was glad she was getting close to Enzo, and she seemed encouraged by
my approval. We went back to being the girls of long ago, we began joking,
partly serious, partly pretending, saying to each other: You do the talking,
you’re bolder, no you, you’re dressed like a lady, I’m not in a hurry, I’m not,
either, then why are we going.
The doctor was waiting for us at the entrance, in a white coat. She was a
cordial woman, with a shrill voice. She invited us to the café and treated us like
old friends. She emphasized repeatedly that she wasn’t a gynecologist, but she
was so full of explanations and advice that, while I kept to myself, somewhat
bored, Lila asked increasingly explicit questions, made objections, asked new
questions,  offered  ironic  observations.  They  became  very  friendly.  Finally,
along with many recommendations, she gave each of us a prescription. The
doctor refused to be paid because, she said, it was a mission she and her friends
had. As she left—she had to go back to work—instead of shaking hands she
embraced us. Lila, once we were in the street, said seriously: Finally a good
person. She was cheerful then—I hadn’t seen her like that for a long time.
52.
In spite of the editor’s enthusiasm, l’Unità put off publishing my article. I was
anxious,  afraid  that  it  wouldn’t  come  out  at  all.  But  the  day  after  the
neurological exam I went out early to the newsstand and scanned the paper,
jumping rapidly from page to page, until, at last, I found it. I expected that it
would run, heavily cut, amid the local items, but instead it was in the national
news, complete, with my byline, which pierced me like a long needle when I
saw it in print. Pietro called me, happy about it, and Adele, too, was pleased;
she  said  that  her  husband  had  liked  the  article  very  much  and  so  had
Mariarosa. But the surprising thing was that the head of my publishing house,
along with two well-known intellectuals who had been connected to the firm
for years, and Franco, Franco Mari, telephoned to congratulate me. Franco had
asked Mariarosa for my number, and he spoke with respect, he said that he was
pleased, that I had provided an example of a thorough investigation into the
condition of workers, that he hoped to see me soon to talk about it. I expected
at that point that through some unforeseen channel Nino would communicate
his  approval.  But  in  vain—I  was  disappointed.  There  was  no  word  from
Pasquale, either, but then out of political disgust he had long ago stopped
reading the party newspaper. The editor from l’Unità, however, consoled me,
seeking me out to tell me how much the editorial office had liked the piece,
and encouraging me, in his usual teasing way, to buy a typewriter and write
more good articles.
I have to say that the most disorienting phone call was from Bruno Soccavo.
He  had  his  secretary  call  me,  then  he  got  on  the  phone.  He  spoke  in  a
melancholy tone, as if the article, which he didn’t even mention at first, had hit
him so hard that it had sapped his energy. He said that in our time on Ischia,
and our beautiful walks on the beach, he had loved me as he had never loved.
He declared his utter admiration for the direction that, although I was very
young, I had given to my life. He swore that his father had handed over to him
a business in a lot of trouble, beset by evil practices, and that he was merely
the blameless inheritor of a situation that in his eyes was deplorable. He stated
that my article—finally he mentioned it—had been illuminating and that he
wished to correct as soon as possible the many defects inherited from the past.
He  was  sorry  about  the  misunderstandings  with  Lila  and  told  me  that  the
administration was arranging everything with my lawyer. He concluded softly:
you know the Solaras, in this difficult situation they’re helping me give the
Soccavo factory a new face. And he added: Michele sends you warm greetings. I
exchanged the greetings, I took note of his good intentions, and I hung up. But
right away I called Mariarosa’s lawyer friend to tell him about that phone call.
He confirmed that the money question had been resolved, and I met him a few
days later in the office where he worked. He wasn’t much older than me, well
dressed, and likable, except for unpleasantly thin lips. He wanted to take me
out for coffee. He was full of admiration for Guido Airota, he remembered
Pietro well. He gave me the sum that Soccavo had paid for Lila, he urged me to
be careful not to have my purse snatched. He described the chaos of students
and union members and police he had found at the gates, he said that the labor
inspector had also showed up at the factory. And yet he didn’t seem satisfied.
Only when we were saying goodbye, he asked me at the door: “You know the
Solaras?”
“They’re from the neighborhood where I grew up.”
“You know that they are behind Soccavo?”
“Yes.”
“And you’re not worried?”
“I don’t understand.”
“I  mean:  the  fact  that  you’ve  known  them  forever  and  that  you  studied
outside Naples—maybe you can’t see the situation clearly.”
“It’s very clear.”
“In recent years the Solaras have expanded, in this city they’re important.”
“And so?”
He pressed his lips together, shook my hand.
“And so nothing: we’ve got the money, everything’s in order. Say hello to
Mariarosa and Pietro. When’s the wedding? Do you like Florence?”
53.
I gave the money to Lila, who counted it twice with satisfaction and wanted
to give me back immediately the amount I had lent her. Enzo arrived soon
afterward, he had just been to see the person who knew about computers. He
seemed  pleased,  naturally  within  the  bounds  of  his  impassiveness,  which,
maybe even against his own wishes, choked off emotions and words. Lila and I
struggled to get the information out of him, but finally a fairly clear picture
emerged. The expert had been extremely kind. At first he had repeated that
the Zurich course was a waste of money, but then he had realized that Enzo, in
spite of the uselessness of the course, was smart. He had told him that IBM was
about to start producing a new computer in Italy, in the Vimercate factory, and
that the Naples branch had an urgent need for operators, keypunch operators,
programmer-analysts.  He  had  assured  him  that,  as  soon  as  the  company
started training courses, he would let Enzo know. He had written down all his
information.
“Did he seem serious?” Lila asked.
Enzo, to give proof of the man’s seriousness, nodded at me, said: “He knew
all about Lenuccia’s fiancé.”
“Meaning?”
“He told me he’s the son of an important person.”
Annoyance showed in Lila’s face. She knew, obviously, that the appointment
had been arranged by Pietro and that the name Airota counted in the positive
outcome of the meeting, but she seemed put out by the fact that Enzo should
notice  it.  I  thought  she  was  bothered  by  the  idea  that  he,  too,  owed  me
something,  as  if  that  debt,  which  between  her  and  me  could  have  no
consequence,  not  even  the  subordination  of  gratitude,  might  instead  be
harmful to Enzo. I said quickly that the prestige of my father-in-law didn’t
count that much, that the computer expert had explained even to me that he
would help only if Enzo was good. And Lila, making a slightly excessive gesture
of approval, said emphatically: “He’s really good.”
“I’ve never seen a computer,” Enzo said.
“So? That guy must have understood anyway that you know what you’re
doing.”
He  thought  about  it,  and  turned  to  Lila  with  an  admiration  that  for  an
instant made me jealous: “He was impressed by the exercises you made me
do.”
“Really?”
“Yes. Especially diagramming things like ironing, and hammering a nail.”
Then they began joking with one another, resorting to a jargon that I didn’t
understand and that excluded me. And suddenly they seemed to me a couple in
love, very happy, with a secret so secret that it was unknown even to them. I
saw again the courtyard when we were children. I saw her and Enzo competing
to be first in arithmetic as the principal and Maestra Olivieri looked on. I saw
Lila, who never cried, in despair because she had thrown a rock and injured
him. I thought: their way of being together comes from something better in
the neighborhood. Maybe Lila is right to want to go back.
54.
I  began  to  pay  attention  to  the  “For  rent”  signs  fixed  to  the  building
entrances, indicating apartments available. Meanwhile, an invitation to the
wedding of Gigliola Spagnuolo and Michele Solara arrived, not for my family
but for me. And a few hours later, by hand, came another invitation: Marisa
Sarratore  and  Alfonso  Carracci  were  getting  married,  and  both  the  Solara
family and the Carracci family addressed me with deference: egregia dottoressa
Elena Greco. Almost immediately, I considered the two wedding invitations an
opportunity to find out if it was a good idea to encourage Lila’s return to the
neighborhood. I planned to go and see Michele, Alfonso, Gigliola, and Marisa,
apparently  to  offer  congratulations  and  to  explain  that  I  would  not  be  in
Naples when the weddings took place but in fact to discover if the Solaras and
the Carraccis still wanted to torture Lila. It seemed to me that Alfonso was the
only person capable of telling me in a dispassionate way how resentful Stefano
still  was.  And  with  Michele,  even  though  I  hated  him—perhaps  above  all
because  I  hated  him—I  thought  I  could  speak  with  composure  about  Lila’s
health problems, letting him know that, even though he thought he was a big
shot and teased me as if I were still a little girl, I now had sufficient power to
complicate his life, and his affairs, if he continued to persecute my friend. I put
both cards in my purse, I didn’t want my mother to see them and be offended
at the respect shown to me and not to my father and her. I set aside a day to
devote to these visits.
The weather wasn’t promising, so I carried an umbrella, but I was in a good
mood, I wanted to walk, reflect, give a sort of farewell to the neighborhood and
the city. Out of the habit of a diligent student, I started with the more difficult
meeting, the one with Solara. I went to the bar, but neither he nor Gigliola nor
even Marcello was there; someone said that they might be at the new place on
the stradone. I stopped in and looked around with the attitude of someone with
nothing better to do. Any memory of Don Carlo’s shop had been utterly erased
—the dark, deep cave where as a child I had gone to buy liquid soap and other
household things. From the windows of the building’s third floor an enormous
vertical sign hung down over the wide entrance: Everything for Everyone. The
store was brightly lit, even though it was day, and offered merchandise of
every type, the triumph of abundance. I saw Lila’s brother, Rino, who had
grown very fat. He treated me coldly, saying that he was the boss there, he
didn’t know anything about the Solaras. If you’re looking for Michele, go to his
house, he said bitterly, and turned his back as if he had something urgent to
do.
I started walking again, and reached the new neighborhood, where I knew
that  the  entire  Solara  family  had,  years  earlier,  bought  an  enormous
apartment. The mother, Manuela, the loan shark, opened the door; I hadn’t
seen her since the time of Lila’s wedding. I felt that she had been observing me
through the spyhole. She looked for a long time, then she drew back the bolt
and appeared in the frame of the door, her figure partly contained by the
darkness of the apartment, partly eroded by the light coming from the large
window on the stairs. She was as if dried up. The skin was stretched over her
large bones, one of her pupils was very bright and the other as if dead. In her
ears, around her neck, against the dark dress that hung loosely, gold sparkled,
as if she were getting ready for a party. She treated me politely, inviting me to
come in, have coffee. Michele wasn’t there, did I know that he had another
house, on Posillipo, where he was to go and live after his marriage. He was
furnishing it with Gigliola.
“They’re going to leave the neighborhood?” I asked.
“Yes, certainly.”
“For Posillipo?”
“Six rooms, Lenù, three facing the sea. I would have preferred the Vomero,
but Michele does as he likes. Anyway, there’s a breeze, in the morning, and a
light that you can’t imagine.”
I was surprised. I would never have believed that the Solaras would move
away from the area of their trafficking, from the den where they hid their
booty. But here was Michele, the shrewdest, the greediest of the family, going
to live somewhere else, up, on the Posillipo, facing the sea and Vesuvio. The
brothers’ craving for greatness really had increased, the lawyer was right. But
at the moment the fact cheered me, I was glad that Michele was leaving the
neighborhood. I found that this favored Lila’s possible return.
55.
I asked Signora Manuela for the address, said goodbye, and crossed the city,
first by subway to Mergellina, then on foot, and by bus up Posillipo. I was
curious. I now felt that I belonged to a legitimate power, universally admired,
haloed by a high level of culture, and I wanted to see what garish guise was
being given to the power I had had before my eyes since childhood—the vulgar
pleasure of bullying, the unpunished practice of crime, the smiling tricks of
obedience to the law, the display of profligacy—as embodied by the Solara
brothers. But Michele escaped me again. On the top floor of a recent structure I
found only Gigliola, who greeted me with obvious amazement and an equally
obvious bitterness. I realized that as long as I had used her mother’s telephone
at all hours I had been cordial, but ever since I’d had the phone installed at
home the entire Spagnuolo family had gone out of my life, and I’d scarcely
noticed. And now without warning, at noon, on a dark day that threatened
rain, I showed up here, in Posillipo, bursting into the house of a bride where
everything was still topsy-turvy? I was ashamed, and greeted her with artificial
warmth so that she would forgive me. For a while Gigliola remained sullen, and
perhaps also alarmed, then her need to boast prevailed. She wanted me to envy
her,  she  wanted  to  feel  in  a  tangible  way  that  I  considered  her  the  most
fortunate of us all. And so, observing my reactions, enjoying my enthusiasm,
she showed me the rooms, one by one, the expensive furniture, the gaudy
lamps, two big bathrooms, the huge hot-water heater, the refrigerator, the
washing machine, three telephones, unfortunately not yet hooked up, the I
don’t know how many-inch television, and finally the terrace, which wasn’t a
terrace but a hanging garden filled with flowers, whose multicolored variety
the ugly day kept me from appreciating.
“Look, have you ever seen the sea like that? And Naples? And Vesuvius? And
the sky? In the neighborhood was there ever all that sky?”
Never. The sea was of lead and the gulf clasped it like the rim of a crucible. A
dense churning mass of black clouds was rolling toward us. But in the distance,
between sea and clouds, there was a long gash that collided with the violet
shadow of Vesuvius, a wound from which a dazzling whiteness dripped. We
stood looking at it for a long time, our clothes pasted to us by the wind. I was as
if  hypnotized  by  the  beauty  of  Naples;  not  even  from  the  terrace  of  the
Galianis,  years  before,  had  I  seen  it  like  this.  The  defacement  of  the  city
provided  high-cost  observatories  of  concrete  from  which  to  view  an
extraordinary landscape; Michele had acquired a memorable one.
“Don’t you like it?”
“Marvelous.”
“There’s no comparison with Lina’s house in the neighborhood, is there?”
“No, no comparison.”
“I said Lina, but now Ada’s there.”
“Yes.”
“Here it’s much more upper-class.”
“Yes.”
“But you made a face.”
“No, I’m happy for you.”
“To each his own. You’re educated, you write books, and I have this.”
“Yes.”
“You’re not sure.”
“I’m very sure.”
“If you look at the nameplates in this building, you’ll see, only professionals,
lawyers, big professors. The view and the luxuries are expensive. If you and
your husband save, in my opinion you could buy a house like this.”
“I don’t think so.”
“He doesn’t want to come and live in Naples?”
“I doubt it.”
“You never know. You’re lucky: I’ve heard Pietro’s voice on the telephone
quite a few times, and I saw him from the window—it’s obvious that he’s a
clever man. He’s not like Michele, he’ll do what you want.”
At that point she dragged me inside, she wanted us to eat something. She
unwrapped prosciutto and provolone, she cut slices of bread. It’s still camping,
she apologized, but sometime when you’re in Naples with your husband come
and see me, I’ll show you how I’ve arranged everything. Her eyes were big and
shining,  she  was  excited  by  the  effort  of  leaving  no  doubts  about  her
prosperity.  But  that  improbable  future—Pietro  and  I  coming  to  Naples  and
visiting her and Michele—must have appeared perilous. For a moment she was
distracted, she had bad thoughts, and when she resumed her boasting she had
lost faith in what she was saying, she began to change. I’ve been lucky, too, she
repeated, yet she spoke without satisfaction—rather, with a kind of sarcasm
addressed to herself. Carmen, she enumerated, ended up with the gas pump
attendant  on  the  stradone,  Pinuccia  is  poisoned  by  that  idiot  Rino,  Ada  is
Stefano’s  whore.  Instead,  I  have  Michele,  lucky  me,  who  is  handsome,
intelligent, bosses everybody, is finally making up his mind to marry me and
you see where he’s put me, you don’t know what a celebration he’s prepared—
not even the Shah of Persia when he married Soraya had a wedding like ours.
Yes, lucky I grabbed him as a child, I was the sly one. And she went on, but
taking  a  self-mocking  turn.  She  wove  the  praises  of  her  own  cleverness,
slipping slowly from the luxuries that she had acquired by winning Solara to
the solitude of her duties as a bride. Michele, she said, is never here, it’s as if I
were getting married by myself. And she suddenly asked me, as if she really
wanted an opinion: Do you think I exist? Look at me, in your view do I exist?
She hit her full breasts with her open hand, but she did it as if to demonstrate
physically that the hand went right through her, that her body, because of
Michele, wasn’t there. He had taken everything of her, immediately, when she
was almost a child. He had consumed her, crumpled her, and now that she was
twenty-five he was used to her, he didn’t even look at her anymore. He fucks
here and there as he likes. The revulsion I feel, when someone asks how many
children  do  you  want  and  he  brags,  he  says:  Ask  Gigliola,  I  already  have
children, I don’t even know how many. Does your husband say such things?
Does your husband say: With Lenuccia I want three, with the others I don’t
know? In front of everyone he treats me like a rag for wiping the floor. And I
know why. He’s never loved me. He’s marrying me to have a faithful servant,
that’s the reason all men get married. And he keeps saying to me: What the
fuck am I doing with you, you don’t know anything, you have no intelligence,
you have no taste, this beautiful house is wasted, with you everything becomes
disgusting. She began to cry, saying between her sobs: “I’m sorry, I’m talking
like this because you wrote that book I liked, and I know you’ve suffered.”
“Why do you let him say those things to you?”
“Because otherwise he won’t marry me.”
“But after the wedding make him pay for it.”
“How? He doesn’t give a damn about me: even now I never see him, imagine
afterward.”
“Then I don’t understand you.”
“You don’t understand me because you’re not me. Would you take someone
if you knew very well that he was in love with someone else?”
I looked at her in bewilderment: “Michele has a lover?”
“Lots of them, he’s a man, he sticks it in wherever he can. But that’s not the
point.”
“What is?”
“Lenù, if I tell you you mustn’t repeat it to anyone, otherwise Michele will
kill me.”
I promised, and I kept the promise: I write it here, now, only because she’s
dead. She said: “He loves Lina. And he loves her in a way he never loved me, in
a way he’ll never love anyone.”
“Nonsense.”
“You mustn’t say it’s nonsense, Lenù, otherwise it’s better that you go. It’s
true. He’s loved Lina since the terrible day when she put the shoemaker’s knife
to Marcello’s throat. I’m not making it up, he told me.”
And she told me things that disturbed me profoundly. She told me that not
long before, in that very house, Michele had gotten drunk one night and told
her how many women he had been with, the precise number: a hundred and
twenty-two,  paying  and  free.  You’re  on  that  list,  he  said  emphatically,  but
you’re certainly not among those who gave me the most pleasure. You know
why? Because you’re an idiot, and even to fuck well it takes a little intelligence.
For example you don’t know how to give a blow job, you’re hopeless, and it’s
pointless to explain it to you, you can’t do it, it’s too obvious that it disgusts
you.  And  he  went  on  like  that  for  a  while,  making  speeches  that  became
increasingly crude; with him vulgarity was normal. Then he wanted to explain
clearly how things stood: he was marrying her because of the respect he felt
for her father, a skilled pastry maker he was fond of; he was marrying her
because one had to have a wife and even children and even an official house.
But there should be no mistake: she was nothing to him, he hadn’t put her on a
pedestal, she wasn’t the one he loved best, so she had better not be a pain in
the ass, believing she had some rights. Brutal words. At a certain point Michele
himself must have realized it, and he became gripped by a kind of melancholy.
He had murmured that women for him were all games with a few holes for
playing in. All. All except one. Lina was the only woman in the world he loved—
love, yes, as in the films—and respected. He told me, Gigliola sobbed, that she
would  have  known  how  to  furnish  this  house.  He  told  me  that  giving  her
money to spend, yes, that would be a pleasure. He told me that with her he
could have become truly important, in Naples. He said to me: You remember
what she did with the wedding photo, you remember how she fixed up the
shop? And you, and Pinuccia, and all the others, what the fuck are you, what
the fuck do you know how to do? He had said those things to her and not only
those. He had told her that he thought about Lila night and day, but not with
normal desire, his desire for her didn’t resemble what he knew. In reality he
didn’t want her. That is, he didn’t want her the way he generally wanted women,
to feel them under him, to turn them over, turn them again, open them up,
break them, step on them, and crush them. He didn’t want her in order to have
sex and then forget her. He wanted the subtlety of her mind with all its ideas.
He wanted her imagination. And he wanted her without ruining her, to make
her last. He wanted her not to screw her—that word applied to Lila disturbed
him. He wanted to kiss her and caress her. He wanted to be caressed, helped,
guided, commanded. He wanted to see how she changed with the passage of
time, how she aged. He wanted to talk with her and be helped to talk. You
understand? He spoke of her in way that to me, to me—when we are about to
get married—he has never spoken. I swear it’s true. He whispered: My brother
Marcello, and that dickhead Stefano, and Enzo with his cheeky face, what have
they understood of Lina? Do they know what they’ve lost, what they might
lose? No, they don’t have the intelligence. I alone know what she is, who she is.
I recognized her. And I suffer thinking of how she’s wasted. He was raving, just
like that, unburdening himself. And I listened to him without saying a word,
until he fell asleep. I looked at him and I said: how is it possible that Michele is
capable of that feeling—it’s not him speaking, it’s someone else. And I hated
that someone else, I thought: Now I’ll stab him in his sleep and take back my
Michele. Lila no, I’m not angry with her. I wanted to kill her years ago, when
Michele took the shop on Piazza dei Martiri away from me and sent me back
behind the counter in the pastry shop. Then I felt like shit. But I don’t hate her
anymore, she has nothing to do with it. She always wanted to get out of it.
She’s not a fool like me, I’m the one marrying him, she’ll never take him. In
fact, since Michele will grab everything there is to grab, but not her, I’ve loved
her for quite a while: at least there’s someone who can make him shit blood.
I listened, now and then I tried to play it down, to console her. I said: If he’s
marrying you it means that, whatever he says, you’re important to him, don’t
feel hopeless. Gigliola shook her head energetically, she dried her cheeks with
her fingers. You don’t know him, she said, no one knows him like me. I asked:
“Could he lose his head, do you think, and hurt Lina?”
She uttered a kind exclamation, between a laugh and a cry.
“Him? Lina? Haven’t you seen how he’s behaved all these years? He could
hurt me, you, anyone, even his father, his mother, his brother. He could hurt
all the people Lina is attached to, her son, Enzo. And he could do it without a
qualm, coldly. But to her, her person, he will never do anything.”
56.
I decided to complete my exploratory tour. I walked to Mergellina and when
I reached Piazza dei Martiri the black sky was so low that it seemed to be
resting on the buildings. I hurried into the elegant Solara shoe store certain
that the storm would burst at any moment. Alfonso was even more handsome
than I remembered, with his big eyes and long lashes, his sharply drawn lips,
his slender yet strong body, his Italian made slightly artificial by the study of
Latin and Greek. He was genuinely happy to see me. The arduous years of
middle school and high school we’d spent together had created an affectionate
bond, and even though we hadn’t seen each other for a long time, we picked up
again right away. We started joking. We talked easily, the words tumbling out,
about our academic past, the teachers, the book I had published, his marriage,
mine. It was I, naturally, who brought up Lila, and he became flustered, he
didn’t want to speak ill of her, or of his brother, or Ada. He said only: “It was
predictable that it would end like this.”
“Why?”
“You remember when I told you that Lina scared me?”
“Yes.”
“It wasn’t fear, I understood much later.”
“What was it?”
“Estrangement  and  belonging,  an  effect  of  distance  and  closeness  at  the
same time.”
“Meaning what?”
“It’s hard to say: you and I became friends immediately, you I love. With her
that always seemed impossible. There was something tremendous about her
that  made  me  want  to  go  down  on  my  knees  and  confess  my  most  secret
thoughts.”
I said ironically: “Great, an almost religious experience.”
He remained serious: “No, only an admission of inferiority. But when she
helped  me  study,  that  was  great,  yes.  She  would  read  the  textbook  and
immediately understand it, then she’d summarize it for me in a simple way.
There have been, and still are today, moments when I think: If I had been born
a woman I would have wanted to be like her. In fact, in the Carracci family we
were both alien bodies, neither she nor I could endure. So her faults never
mattered to me, I always felt on her side.”
“Is Stefano still angry with her?”
“I don’t know. Even if he hates her, he has too many problems to be aware of
it. Lina is the least of his troubles at the moment.”
The statement seemed sincere and, above all, well founded. I put Lina aside. I
went back instead to asking him about Marisa, the Sarratore family, finally
Nino.  He  was  vague  about  all  of  them,  especially  Nino,  whom  no  one—by
Donato’s wishes, he said—had dared to invite to the intolerable wedding that
was in store for him.
“You’re not happy to be getting married?” I ventured.
He looked out the window: there was lightning and thunder but still no rain.
He said: “I was fine the way I was.”
“And Marisa?”
“No, she wasn’t fine.”
“You wanted her to be your fiancée for life?”
“I don’t know.”
“So finally you’ve satisfied her.”
“She went to Michele.”
I looked at him uncertainly. “In what sense?”
He laughed, a nervous laugh.
“She went to him, she set him against me.”
I was sitting on a pouf, he was standing, against the light. He had a tense,
compact figure, like the toreador in a bullfighting film.
“I don’t understand: you’re marrying Marisa because she asked Solara to tell
you that you had to do it?”
“I’m marrying Marisa in order not to upset Michele. He put me in here, he
trusted my abilities, I’m fond of him.”
“You’re crazy.”
“You say that because you all have the wrong idea about Michele, you don’t
know what he’s like.” His face contracted, he tried vainly to hold back tears. He
added, “Marisa is pregnant.”
“Ah.”
So that was the real reason. I took his hand, in great embarrassment I tried
to soothe him. He became quiet with a great effort, and said: “Life is a very ugly
business, Lenù.”
“It’s not true: Marisa will be a good wife and a fine mother.”
“I don’t give a damn about Marisa.”
“Now don’t overdo it.”
He fixed his eyes on me, I felt he was examining me as if to understand
something  about  me  that  left  him  bewildered.  He  asked:  “Lina  never  said
anything even to you?”
“What should she have said?”
He shook his head, suddenly amused.
“You see I’m right? She is an unusual person. Once I told her a secret. I was
afraid and I needed to tell someone the reason for my fear. I told her and she
listened attentively, and I calmed down. It was important for me to talk to her,
it seemed to me that she listened not with her ears but with an organ that she
alone had and that made the words acceptable. At the end I didn’t ask her, as
one usually does: swear, please, not to betray me. But it’s clear that if she
hasn’t told you she hasn’t told anyone, not even out of spite, not even in the
period that was hardest for her, when my brother hated her and beat her.”
I didn’t interrupt him. I felt only that I was sorry because he had confided
something to Lila and not to me, although I had been his friend forever. He
must have realized that and he decided to make up for it. He hugged me tight,
and whispered in my ear: “Lenù, I’m a queer, I don’t like girls.”
When I was about to leave, he said softly, embarrassed: I’m sure you already
knew. This increased my unhappiness; in fact it had never occurred to me.
57.
The long day passed in that way, without rain but dark. And then began a
reversal that rapidly changed a phase of apparent growth in the relationship
between Lila and me into a desire to cut it off and return to taking care of my
own life. Or maybe it had begun before that, in tiny details that I scarcely
noticed as they struck me, and now instead were starting to add up. The trip
had been useful, and yet I came home unhappy. What sort of friendship was
mine and Lila’s, if she had been silent about Alfonso for years, though she knew
I had a close relationship with him? Was it possible that she hadn’t realized
Michele’s absolute dependence on her, or for her own reasons had she decided
not to say anything? On the other hand, I—how many things had I kept hidden
from her?
For the rest of the day I inhabited a chaos of places, times, various people:
the haunted Signora Manuela, the vacuous Rino, Gigliola in elementary school,
Gigliola in middle school, Gigliola seduced by the potent good looks of the
Solara  boys,  Gigliola  dazzled  by  the  Fiat  1100,  and  Michele  who  attracted
women like Nino but, unlike him, was capable of an absolute passion, and Lila,
Lila who had aroused that passion, a rapture that was fed not only by a craving
for possession, by thuggish bragging, by revenge, by low-level desire, as she
might say, but was an obsessive form of appreciation of a woman, not devotion,
not  subservience,  but  rather  a  sought-after  form  of  male  love,  a  complex
feeling  that  was  capable—with  determination,  with  a  kind  of  ferocity—of
making  a  woman  the  chosen  among  women.  I  felt  close  to  Gigliola,  I
understood her humiliation.
That night I went to see Lila and Enzo. I didn’t say anything about that
exploration I had made for love of her and also to protect the man she lived
with.  I  took  advantage  instead  of  a  moment  when  Lila  was  in  the  kitchen
feeding the child to tell Enzo that she wanted to go back to the neighborhood. I
decided not to hide my opinion. I said it didn’t seem like a good idea to me, but
that anything that could help stabilize her—she was healthy, she had only to
regain some equilibrium—or that she considered such, should be encouraged.
All the more since time had passed and, as far as I knew, in the neighborhood
they wouldn’t be worse off than in San Giovanni a Teduccio. Enzo shrugged.
“I have nothing against it. I’ll have to get up earlier in the morning, return a
little later in the evening.”
“I saw that Don Carlo’s old apartment is for rent. The children have gone to
Caserta and the widow wants to join them.”
“What’s the rent?”
I told him: in the neighborhood the rents were lower than in San Giovanni a
Teduccio.
“All right,” Enzo agreed.
“You realize you’ll have some problems anyway.”
“There are problems here, too.”
“The irritations will increase, and also the claims.”
“We’ll see.”
“You’ll stay with her?”
“As long as she wants, yes.”
We joined Lila in the kitchen. She had just had a fight with Gennaro. Now
that the child spent more time with his mother and less with the neighbor he
was disoriented. He had less freedom, he was forced to give up a set of habits,
and he rebelled by insisting, at the age of five, on being fed with a spoon. Lila
had started yelling, he had thrown the plate, which shattered on the floor.
When  we  went  into  the  kitchen  she  had  just  slapped  him.  She  said  to  me
aggressively: “Was it you who pretended the spoon was an airplane?”
“Just once.”
“You shouldn’t.”
I said: “It won’t happen again.”
“No, never again, because you’re going to be a writer and I have to waste my
time like this.”
Slowly she grew calmer, I wiped up the floor. Enzo told her that looking for a
place in the neighborhood was fine with him, and I told her about Don Carlo’s
apartment,  smothering  my  resentment.  She  listened  unwillingly  as  she
comforted the child, then she reacted as if it were Enzo who wanted to move,
as if I were the one encouraging that choice. She said: All right, I’ll do as you
like.
The next day we all went to see the apartment. It was in poor condition, but
Lila was enthusiastic: she liked that it was on the edge of the neighborhood,
almost near the tunnel, and that from the windows you could see the gas pump
of Carmen’s fiancé. Enzo observed that at night they would be disturbed by the
trucks that passed on the stradone and by the trains at the shunting yard. But
since  she  found  pleasure  even  in  the  sounds  that  had  been  part  of  our
childhood, they came to an agreement with the widow for a suitable rent. From
then on, every evening Enzo, instead of returning to San Giovanni a Teduccio,
went to the neighborhood to carry out a series of improvements that would
transform the apartment into a worthy home.
It was now almost May, the date of my wedding was approaching, and I was
going back and forth to Florence. But Lila, as if she considered that deadline
irrelevant, drew me into shopping for the finishing touches for the apartment.
We bought a double bed, a cot for Gennaro, we went together to apply for a
telephone line. People saw us on the street, some greeted only me, some both,
others pretended not to have seen either of us. Lila seemed in any case relaxed.
Once we ran into Ada; she was alone, she nodded cordially, and kept going as if
she were in a hurry. Once we met Maria, Stefano’s mother, Lila and I greeted
her, she turned her head. Once Stefano himself passed in the car and stopped
of his own initiative; he got out of the car, spoke only to me, cheerfully, asked
about my wedding, praised Florence, where he had been recently with Ada and
the child; finally patted Gennaro, gave a nod to Lila, and left. Once we saw
Fernando, Lila’s father: bent and very aged, he was standing in front of the
elementary school, and Lila became agitated, she told Gennaro that she wanted
him to meet his grandfather. I tried to restrain her, but she wanted to go
anyway, and Fernando, behaving as if his daughter weren’t present, looked at
his grandson for a few seconds and said plainly, If you see your mother, tell her
she’s a whore, and went off.
But the most disturbing encounter, even if at the time it seemed the least
significant, was a few days before she finally moved to the new apartment. Just
as we came out of the house, we ran into Melina, who was holding by the hand
her granddaughter Maria, the child of Stefano and Ada. She had her usual
absent-minded air but she was nicely dressed, she had peroxided her hair, her
face was heavily made up. She recognized me but not Lila, or maybe at first she
chose to speak only to me. She talked to me as if I were still the girlfriend of
her son, Antonio: she said that he would be back soon from Germany and that
in his letters he always asked about me. I complimented her warmly on her
dress and her hair, she seemed pleased. But she was even more pleased when I
praised her granddaughter, who timidly clung to her grandmother’s skirt. At
that point she must have felt obliged to say something nice about Gennaro, and
she turned to Lila: Is he your son? Only then did she seem to remember her.
Until that moment she had stared at her without saying a word, and it must
have  occurred  to  her  that  here  was  the  woman  whose  husband  her  own
daughter Ada had taken. Her eyes were sunk deep in the large sockets, she said
seriously: Lina, you’ve gotten ugly and thin, of course Stefano left you, men
like flesh, otherwise they don’t know where to put their hands and they leave.
Then with a rapid jerk of her head she turned to Gennaro, and pointing to the
little girl almost screamed: You know that’s your sister? Give each other a kiss,
come on, my goodness how cute you are. Gennaro immediately kissed the girl,
who let herself be kissed without protesting, and Melina, seeing the two faces
next  to  each  other,  exclaimed:  They  both  take  after  their  father,  they’re
identical. After that statement, as if she had urgent things to do, she tugged
her granddaughter and left without another word.
Lila  had  stood  mute  the  whole  time.  But  I  understood  that  something
extremely violent had happened to her, like the time when, as a child, she had
seen Melina walking on the stradone eating soap flakes. As soon as the woman
and the child were some distance away, she started, she ruffled her hair with
one hand, she blinked, she said: I’ll become like that. Then she tried to smooth
her hair, saying: “Did you hear what she said?”
“It’s not true that you’re ugly and skinny.”
“Who  gives  a  damn  if  I’m  ugly  and  skinny,  I’m  talking  about  the
resemblance.”
“What resemblance?”
“Between  the  two  children.  Melina’s  right,  they’re  both  identical  to
Stefano.”
“Come on, the girl is, but Gennaro is different.”
She burst out laughing: after a long time her old, mean laugh was back.
She repeated: “They’re two peas in a pod.”
58.
I absolutely had to go. What I could do for her I had done, now I was in
danger of getting caught up in useless reflections on who the real father of
Gennaro was, on how far-seeing Melina was, on the secret motions of Lila’s
mind, on what she knew or didn’t know or supposed and didn’t say, or was
convenient for her to believe, and so on, in a spiral that was damaging to me.
We discussed that encounter, taking advantage of the fact that Enzo was at
work. I used clichés like: A woman always knows who the father of her children
is. I said: You always felt that child was Nino’s, in fact you wanted him for that
reason, and now you’re sure it’s Stefano’s just because crazy Melina said so?
But she sneered, she said: What an idiot, how could I not have known, and—
something incomprehensible to me—she seemed pleased. So in the end I was
silent. If that new conviction helped her to feel better, good. And if it was
another sign of her instability, what could I do? Enough. My book had been
bought in France, Spain, and Germany, it would be translated. I had published
two more articles on women working in factories in Campania, and l’Unità was
content. From the publisher came solicitations for a new novel. In other words,
I had to take care of countless things of my own; for Lila I had done all I could,
and  I  couldn’t  continue  to  get  lost  in  the  tangles  of  her  life.  In  Milan,
encouraged by Adele, I bought a cream-colored suit for the wedding, it looked
good on me, the jacket was fitted, the skirt short. When I tried it on I thought
of Lila, of her gaudy wedding dress, of the photograph that the dressmaker had
displayed in the shop window on the Rettifilo, and the contrast made me feel
definitively different. Her wedding, mine: worlds now far apart. I had told her
earlier  that  I  wasn’t  getting  married  in  a  church,  that  I  wouldn’t  wear  a
traditional wedding dress, that Pietro had barely agreed to the presence of
close relatives.
“Why?” she had asked, but without particular interest.
“Why what?”
“Why aren’t you getting married in church.”
“We aren’t believers.”
“And the finger of God, the Holy Spirit?” she had quoted, reminding me of
the article we had written together as girls.
“I’m grown up.”
“But at least have a party, invite your friends.”
“Pietro doesn’t want to.”
“You wouldn’t invite even me?”
“Would you come?”
She laughed, shaking her head.
“No.”
That was it. But in early May, when I had decided on a final venture before
leaving  the  city  for  good,  things  took  an  unpleasant  turn  concerning  my
wedding, but not only that. I decided to go and see Professor Galiani. I looked
for her number, I called. I said I was about to get married, I was going to live in
Florence, I wanted to come and say goodbye to her. She, without surprise,
without  joy,  but  politely,  invited  me  for  five  o’clock  the  next  day.  Before
hanging up she said: Bring your friend, Lina, if you want.
Lila in that case didn’t have to be asked twice, and she left Gennaro with
Enzo. I put on makeup, I fixed my hair, I dressed according to the taste I had
developed from Adele, and helped Lila to at least look respectable, since it was
difficult to persuade her to dress up. She wanted to bring pastries, I said it
wasn’t suitable. Instead I bought a copy of my book, although I assumed that
Professor Galiani had read it: I did it so that I would have a way of inscribing it
to her.
We arrived punctually, rang the bell, silence. We rang again. Nadia opened
the door, breathless, half dressed, without her usual courtesy, as if we had
introduced disorder not only into her appearance but also into her manners. I
explained that I had an appointment with her mother. She’s not here, she said,
but  make  yourselves  comfortable  in  the  living  room.  She  disappeared.  We
remained mute, but exchanged little smiles of uneasiness in the silent house.
Perhaps five minutes passed, finally steps could be heard in the hall. Pasquale
appeared,  slightly  disheveled.  Lila  didn’t  show  the  least  surprise,  but  I
exclaimed,  in  real  astonishment:  What  are  you  doing  here?  He  answered
seriously, unfriendly: What are you two doing here. And the phrase reversed
the situation, I had to explain to him, as if that were his house, that I had an
appointment with my professor.
“Ah,” he said, and asked Lila, teasingly, “Are you recovered?”
“Pretty much.”
“I’m glad.”
I got angry, I answered for her, I said that Lila was only now beginning to get
better and that anyway the Soccavo factory had been taught a lesson—the
inspectors had paid a visit, the business had had to pay Lila everything she was
owed.
“Yes?” he said just as Nadia reappeared, now immaculate, as if she were
going out. “You understand, Nadia? Dottoressa Greco says she taught Soccavo a
lesson.”
I exclaimed: “Not me.”
“Not her, God Almighty taught Soccavo a lesson.”
Nadia gave a slight smile, crossed the room and although there was a sofa
free she sat on Pasquale’s lap. I felt ill at ease.
“I only tried to help Lina.”
Pasquale  put  his  arm  around  Nadia’s  waist,  leaned  toward  me,  said:
“Excellent. You mean that in all the factories, at all the construction sites, in
every corner of Italy and the world, as soon as the owner kicks up a fuss and
the workers are in danger, we’ll call Elena Greco: she telephones her friends,
the labor authority, her connections in high places, and resolves the situation.”
He had never spoken to me like that, not even when I was a girl and he
seemed to me already adult, and acted like a political expert. I was offended,
and was about to answer, but Nadia interrupted, ignoring me. She spoke to
Lila, in her slow little voice, as if it were not worth the trouble to speak to me.
“The labor inspectors don’t count for anything, Lina. They went to Soccavo,
they filled out their forms, but then? In the factory everything is the same as
before. And meanwhile those who spoke out are in trouble, those who were
silent got a few lire under the counter, the police charged us, and the fascists
came right here and beat up Armando.”
She  hadn’t  finished  speaking  when  Pasquale  started  talking  to  me  more
harshly than before, this time raising his voice: “Explain to us what the fuck
you thought you resolved,” he said, with genuine pain and disappointment.
“You know what the situation is in Italy? Do you have any idea what the class
struggle is?”
“Don’t shout, please,” Nadia asked him, then she turned again to Lila, almost
whispering: “Comrades do not abandon one another.”
She answered: “It would have failed anyway.”
“What do you mean?”
“In  that  place  you  don’t  win  with  leaflets  or  even  by  fighting  with  the
fascists.”
“How do you win?”
Lila  was  silent,  and  Pasquale,  now  turning  to  her,  hissed:  “You  win  by
mobilizing the good friends of the owners? You win by getting a little money
and screwing everyone else?”
Then I burst out: “Pasquale, stop it.” Involuntarily I, too, raised my voice.
“What kind of tone is that? It wasn’t like that.”
I wanted to explain, silence him, even though I felt an emptiness in my head,
I didn’t know what arguments to resort to, and the only concept that occurred
to  me  readily  was  malicious  and  politically  useless:  You  treat  me  like  this
because,  now  that  you’ve  got  your  hands  on  this  young  lady  from  a  good
family, you’re full of yourself? But Lila, here, stopped me with a completely
unexpected gesture of irritation, which confused me. She said: “That’s enough,
Lenù, they’re right.”
I was upset. They were right? I wanted to respond, to get angry at her. What
did she mean? But just then Professor Galiani arrived: her footsteps could be
heard in the hall.
59.
I hoped that the professor hadn’t heard me shouting. But at the same time I
wanted  to  see  Nadia  jump  off  Pasquale’s  lap  and  hurry  over  to  the  sofa,  I
wished to see both of them humiliated by the need to pretend an absence of
intimacy. I noticed that Lila, too, looked at them sardonically. But they stayed
where they were; Nadia, in fact, put an arm around Pasquale’s neck, as if she
were afraid of falling, and said to her mother, who had just appeared in the
doorway:  Next  time,  tell  me  if  you’re  having  visitors.  The  professor  didn’t
answer, she turned to us coldly: I’m sorry I was late, let’s sit in my study. We
followed  her,  while  Pasquale  moved  Nadia  off  him,  saying  in  a  tone  that
seemed to me suddenly depressed: Come on, let’s go.
Professor  Galiani  led  us  along  the  hall  muttering  irritably:  What  really
bothers me is the boorishness. We entered an airy room with an old desk, a lot
of books, sober, cushioned chairs. She assumed a polite tone, but it was clear
that she was struggling with a bad mood. She said she was happy to see me and
to see Lila again; yet at every word, and between the words, I felt her rage
increasing, and I wanted to leave as quickly as possible. I apologized for not
having come to see her, and went on somewhat breathlessly about studying,
the book, the innumerable things that had overwhelmed me, my engagement,
my approaching marriage.
“Are you getting married in church or only in a civil service?”
“Only a civil service.”
“Good for you.”
She turned to Lila, to draw her into the conversation: “You were married in
church?”
“Yes.”
“Are you a believer?”
“No.”
“Then why did you get married in church?”
“That’s what’s done.”
“You don’t always have to do things just because they’re done.”
“We do a lot of them.”
“Will you go to Elena’s wedding?”
“She didn’t invite me.”
I was startled, I said right away: “It’s not true.”
Lila laughed harshly: “It’s true, she’s ashamed of me.”
Her tone was ironic, but I felt wounded anyway. What was happening to
her? Why had she said earlier, in front of Nadia and Pasquale, that I was wrong,
and now was making that hostile remark in front of the professor?
“Nonsense,” I said, and to calm down I took the book out of my bag and
handed it to Professor Galiani, saying: I wanted to give you this. She looked at
it for a moment without seeing it, perhaps following her own thoughts, then
she thanked me, and saying that she already had a copy, gave it back: “What
does your husband do?”
“He’s a professor of Latin literature in Florence.”
“Is he a lot older than you?”
“He’s twenty-seven.”
“So young, already a professor?”
“He’s very smart.”
“What’s his name?”
“Pietro Airota.”
Professor Galiani looked at me attentively, like when I was at school and I
gave an answer that she considered incomplete.
“Relative of Guido Airota?”
“He’s his son.”
She smiled with explicit malice.
“Good marriage.”
“We love each other.”
“Have you already started another book?”
“I’m trying.”
“I saw that you’re writing for l’Unità.”
“A bit.”
“I don’t write for it anymore, it’s a newspaper of bureaucrats.”
She turned again to Lila, she seemed to want to let her know how much she
liked her. She said to her: “It’s remarkable what you did in the factory.”
Lila grimaced in annoyance.
“I didn’t do anything.”
“That’s not true.”
The  professor  got  up,  rummaged  through  the  papers  on  the  desk,  and
showed her some pages as if they were an incontrovertible truth.
“Nadia left this around the house and I took the liberty of reading it. It’s a
courageous, new work, very well written. I wanted to see you so that I could
tell you that.”
She was holding in her hand the pages that Lila had written, and from which
I had taken my first article for l’Unità.
60.
Oh yes, it was really time to get out. I left the Galiani house embittered, my
mouth dry, without the courage to say to the professor that she didn’t have the
right to treat me like that. She hadn’t said anything about my book, although
she’d had it for some time and surely had read it or at least skimmed it. She
hadn’t asked for a dedication in the copy I had brought for that reason and
when, before leaving—out of weakness, out of a need to end that relationship
affectionately—I had offered anyway, she hadn’t answered, she had smiled, and
continued to talk to Lila. Above all, she had said nothing about my articles,
rather she had mentioned them only to include them in her negative opinion
of l’Unità, and then pulled out Lila’s pages and began to talk to her as if my
opinion on the subject didn’t count, as if I were no longer in the room. I would
have  liked  to  yell:  Yes,  it’s  true,  Lila  has  a  tremendous  intelligence,  an
intelligence  that  I’ve  always  recognized,  that  I  love,  that’s  influenced
everything  I’ve  done;  but  I’ve  worked  hard  to  develop  mine  and  I’ve  been
successful,  I’m  valued  everywhere,  I’m  not  a  pretentious  nobody  like  your
daughter. Instead, I listened silently while they talked about work and the
factory and the workers demands. They kept talking, even on the landing, until
Professor Galiani absently said goodbye to me, while to Lila she said, now using
the familiar tu, Stay in touch, and embraced her. I felt humiliated. Moreover,
Pasquale and Nadia hadn’t returned, I hadn’t had a chance to refute them and
my anger at them was still raging inside me: why was it wrong to help a friend,
to do it I had taken a risk, how could they dare to criticize what I’d done. Now,
on the stairs, in the lobby, on the sidewalk of Corso Vittorio Emanuele, it was
only Lila and me. I was ready to shout at her: Do you really think I’m ashamed
of you, what were you thinking, why did you say those two were right, you’re
ungrateful, I did all I could to stay close to you, to be useful to you, and you
treat me like that, you really have a sick mind. But as soon as we were outside,
even before I could open my mouth (and on the other hand what would have
changed if I had?), she took me by the arm and began to defend me against
Professor Galiani.
I couldn’t find a single opening in order to reproach her for aligning herself
with Pasquale and Nadia, or for the senseless accusation that I didn’t want her
at my wedding. She behaved as if it had been another Lila who said those
things, a Lila of whom she herself knew nothing and whom it was pointless to
ask  for  explanations.  What  terrible  people—she  began,  and  spoke  without
stopping all the way to the subway at Piazza Amedeo—did you see how the old
woman treated you, she wanted to get revenge, she can’t bear that you write
books  and  articles,  she  can’t  bear  that  you’re  about  to  marry  well,  she
especially can’t bear that Nadia, brought up precisely to be the best of all,
Nadia who was to give her so much satisfaction, isn’t up to anything good, is
sleeping with a construction worker and acting like a whore right in front of
her: no, she can’t bear it, but you’re wrong to be upset, forget about it, you
shouldn’t have left her your book, you shouldn’t have asked if she wanted it
inscribed,  you  especially  shouldn’t  have  done  that,  those  are  people  who
should be treated with a kick in the ass, your weakness is that you’re too good,
you swallow everything that educated people say as if they’re the only ones
who had a mind, but it’s not true, relax, go, get married, have a honeymoon,
you were too worried about me, write another novel, you know that I expect
great things from you, I love you.
I simply listened, overwhelmed. With her, there was no way to feel that
things were settled; every fixed point of our relationship sooner or later turned
out to be provisional; something shifted in her head that unbalanced her and
unbalanced me. I couldn’t understand if those words were in fact intended to
apologize  to  me,  or  if  she  was  lying,  concealing  feelings  that  she  had  no
intention of confiding to me, or if she was aiming at a final farewell. Certainly
she was false, and she was ungrateful, and I, in spite of all that had changed for
me, continued to feel inferior. I felt that I would never free myself from that
inferiority, and that seemed to me intolerable. I wished—and I couldn’t keep
the wish at bay—that the cardiologist had been wrong, that Armando had been
right, that she really was ill and would die.
For years after that, we didn’t see each other, we only talked on the phone.
We  became  for  each  other  fragments  of  a  voice,  without  any  visual
corroboration. But the wish that she would die remained in a far corner, I tried
to get rid of it but it wouldn’t go away.
61.
The  night  before  I  left  for  Florence  I  couldn’t  sleep.  Of  all  the  painful
thoughts the most persistent had to do with Pasquale. His criticisms burned
me. At first I had rejected them altogether, now I was wavering between the
conviction that they were undeserved and the idea that if Lila said he was right
maybe I really had been mistaken. Finally I did something I had never done: I
got out of bed at four in the morning and left the house by myself, before
dawn. I felt very unhappy; I wished something terrible would happen to me, an
event that, punishing me for my mistaken actions and my wicked thoughts,
would as a result punish Lila, too. But nothing happened. I walked for a long
time on the deserted streets, which were much safer than when they were
crowded. The sky turned violet. I reached the sea, a gray sheet under a pale sky
with scattered pink-edged clouds. The mass of Castel dell’Ovo was cut sharply
in two by the light, a shining ochre shape on the Vesuvius side, a brown stain
on the Mergellina and Posillipo side. The road along the cliff was empty, the
sea made no sound but gave off an intense odor. Who knows what feeling I
would have had about Naples, about myself, if I had waked every morning not
in my neighborhood but in one of those buildings along the shore. What am I
seeking? To change my origins? To change, along with myself, others, too?
Repopulate this now deserted city with citizens not assailed by poverty or
greed, not bitter or angry, who could delight in the splendor of the landscape
like the divinities who once inhabited it? Indulge my demon, give him a good
life  and  feel  happy?  I  had  used  the  power  of  the  Airotas,  people  who  for
generations had been fighting for socialism, people who were on the side of
men and women like Pasquale and Lila, not because I thought I would be fixing
all the broken things of the world but because I was in a position to help a
person I loved, and it seemed wrong not to do so. Had I acted badly? Should I
have left Lila in trouble? Never again, never again would I lift a finger for
anyone. I departed, I went to get married.
62.
I don’t remember anything about my wedding. A few photographs, acting as
props,  rather  than  inspiring  memory,  have  frozen  it  around  a  few  images:
Pietro with an absent-minded expression, me looking angry, my mother, who
is out of focus but manages nevertheless to appear unhappy. Or not. It’s the
ceremony itself that I can’t remember, but I have in mind the long discussion I
had with Pietro a few days before we got married. I told him that I intended to
take the Pill in order not to have children, that it seemed to me urgent to try
first of all to write another book. I was sure that he would immediately agree.
Instead, surprisingly, he was opposed. First he made it a problem of legality,
the Pill was not yet officially for sale; then he said there were rumors that it
ruined one’s health; then he made a complicated speech about sex, love, and
reproduction; finally he stammered that someone who really has to write will
write anyway, even if she is expecting a baby. I was unhappy, I was angry, that
reaction seemed to me not consistent with the educated youth who wanted
only a civil marriage, and I told him so. We quarreled. Our wedding day arrived
and we were not reconciled: he was mute, I cold.
There was another surprise, too, that hasn’t faded: the reception. We had
decided to get married, greet our relatives, and go home without any sort of
celebration. That decision had developed through the combination of Pietro’s
ascetic tendency and my intention to demonstrate that I no longer belonged to
the world of my mother. But our line of conduct was secretly undone by Adele.
She dragged us to the house of a friend of hers, for a toast, she said; and there,
instead, Pietro and I found ourselves at the center of a big reception, in a very
aristocratic  Florentine  dwelling,  among  a  large  number  of  relatives  of  the
Airotas and famous and very famous people who lingered until evening. My
husband became taciturn, I wondered, bewildered, why, since in fact it was a
celebration  for  my  wedding,  I  had  had  to  be  limited  to  inviting  only  my
immediate family. I said to Pietro: “Did you know this was happening?”
“No.”
For a while we confronted the situation together. But soon he evaded the
attempts of his mother and sister to introduce him to this man, to that woman;
he entrenched himself in a corner with my relatives and talked to them the
whole time. At first I resigned myself, somewhat uneasily, to inhabiting the
trap  we  had  fallen  into,  then  I  began  to  find  it  exciting  that  well-known
politicians, prestigious intellectuals, young revolutionaries, even a well-known
poet and a famous novelist showed interest in me, in my book, and spoke
admiringly of my articles in l’Unità. The time flew by, I felt more and more
accepted in the world of the Airotas. Even my father-in-law wanted to detain
me, questioning me kindly on my knowledge of labor matters. A small group
formed, of people engaged in the debate, in newspapers and journals, over the
tide of demands that was rising in Italy. And me, here I was, with them, and it
was my celebration, and I was at the center of the conversation.
At  some  point,  my  father-in-law  warmly  praised  an  essay,  published  in
Mondo Operaio, that in his view laid out the problem of democracy in Italy with
crystalline  intelligence.  Drawing  on  a  large  number  of  facts,  the  piece
demonstrated that, as long as the state television, the big papers, the schools,
the universities, the judiciary worked day after day to solidify the dominant
ideology, the electoral system would in fact be rigged, and the workers’ parties
would  never  have  enough  votes  to  govern.  Nods  of  assent,  supporting
citations, references to this article and that one. Finally, Professor Airota, with
all his authority, mentioned the name of the author of the article, and I knew
even before he uttered it—Giovanni Sarratore—that it was Nino. I was so happy
that I couldn’t contain myself, I said I knew him, I called Adele over to confirm
to her husband and the others how brilliant my Neapolitan friend was.
Nino was present at my wedding even if he wasn’t present, and speaking of
him I felt authorized to talk also about myself, about the reasons I had become
involved in the workers’ struggle, about the need to provide the parties and
parliamentary representatives on the left with hard data so that they could
address the delays in their understanding of the current political and economic
period, and so on with other stock phrases I had learned only recently but used
with assurance. I felt clever. My mood brightened; I enjoyed being with my in-
laws  and  feeling  admired  by  their  friends.  At  the  end,  when  my  relatives
timidly said goodbye and hurried off somewhere to wait for the first train to
take them back to Naples, I no longer felt irritated with Pietro. He must have
realized it, because he, in turn, softened, and the tension vanished.
As soon as we got to our apartment and closed the door we began to make
love. At first it was very pleasurable, but the day reserved for me yet another
surprising fact. Antonio, my first boyfriend, when he rubbed against me was
quick and intense; Franco made great efforts to contain himself but at a certain
point he pulled away with a gasp, or when he had a condom stopped suddenly
and seemed to become heavier, crushing me under his weight and laughing in
my ear. Pietro, on the other hand, strained for a time that seemed endless. His
thrusting was deliberate, violent, so that the initial pleasure slowly diminished,
overwhelmed by the monotonous insistence and the hurt I felt in my stomach.
He was covered with sweat from his long exertions, maybe from suffering, and
when I saw his damp face and neck, touched his wet back, desire disappeared
completely. But he didn’t realize it, he continued to withdraw and then sink
into me forcefully, rhythmically, without stopping. I didn’t know what to do. I
caressed him, I whispered words of love, and yet I hoped that he would stop.
When he exploded with a roar and collapsed, finally exhausted, I was content,
even though I was hurting and unsatisfied.
He didn’t stay in bed long; he got up and went to the bathroom. I waited for
him for a few minutes, but I was tired, I fell asleep. I woke with a start after an
hour and realized that he hadn’t come back to bed. I found him in his study, at
the desk.
“What are you doing?”
He smiled at me.
“I’m working.”
“Come to bed.”
“You go, I’ll join you later.”
I’m sure that I became pregnant that night.
63.
As soon as I discovered that I was expecting a child I was overwhelmed by
anxiety and I called my mother. Although our relationship had always been
contentious,  in  that  situation  the  need  to  talk  to  her  prevailed.  It  was  a
mistake: she immediately started nagging. She wanted to leave Naples, settle in
with me, help me, guide me, or, vice versa, bring me to the neighborhood, have
me back in her house, entrust me to the old midwife who had delivered all her
children. I had a hard time putting her off, I said that a gynecologist friend of
my mother-in-law was looking after me, a great professor, and I would give
birth in his clinic. She was offended. She hissed: you prefer your mother-in-law
to me. She didn’t call again.
After a few days, on the other hand, I heard from Lila. We had had some
telephone conversations after I left, but brief, a few minutes, we didn’t want to
spend too much, she cheerful, I aloof, she asking ironically about my life as a
newlywed,  I  inquiring  seriously  about  her  health.  This  time  I  realized  that
something wasn’t right.
“Are you angry with me?” she asked.
“No, why should I be?”
“You don’t tell me anything. I got the news only because your mother is
bragging to everyone that you’re pregnant.”
“I just got the confirmation.”
“I thought you were taking the Pill.”
I was embarrassed.
“Yes, but then I decided not to.”
“Why?”
“The years are passing.”
“And the book you’re supposed to write?”
“I’ll see later.”
“You’d better.”
“I’ll do what I can.”
“You have to do the maximum.”
“I’ll try.”
“I’m taking the Pill.”
“So with Enzo it’s going well?”
“Pretty well, but I don’t ever want to be pregnant again.”
She was silent, and I didn’t say anything, either. When she began talking
once more, she told me about the first time she had realized she was expecting
a baby, and the second. She described both as terrible experiences: the second
time, she said, I was sure the baby was Nino’s and even though I felt sick I was
happy. But, happy or not, you’ll see, the body suffers, it doesn’t like losing its
shape, there’s too much pain. From there she went on in a crescendo that got
darker and darker, telling me things she had told me before but never with the
same desire to pull me into her suffering, so that I, too, would feel it. She
seemed to want to prepare me for what awaited me, she was very worried
about me and my future. This life of another, she said, clings to you in the
womb first and then, when it finally comes out, it takes you prisoner, keeps
you on a leash, you’re no longer your own master. With great animation she
sketched every phase of my maternity, tracing it over hers, expressing herself
with her habitual effectiveness. It’s as if you fabricated your very own torture,
she exclaimed, and I realized then that she wasn’t capable of thinking that she
was her self and I was my self; it seemed to her inconceivable that I could have
a pregnancy different from hers, and a different feeling about children. She so
took it for granted that I would have the same troubles that she seemed ready
to consider any possible joy I found in motherhood a betrayal.
I didn’t want to listen to her anymore, I held the receiver away from my ear,
she was scaring me. We said goodbye coolly.
“If you need me,” she said, “let me know.”
“All right.”
“You helped me, now I want to help you.”
“All right.”
That phone call didn’t help me at all; rather, it left me unsettled. I lived in a
city I knew nothing about, even if thanks to Pietro I now was acquainted with
every corner of it, which I could not say of Naples. I loved the path along the
river, I took beautiful walks, but I didn’t like the color of the houses, it put me
in a bad mood. The teasing tone of the inhabitants—the porter in our building,
the butcher, the baker, the mailman—incited me to become teasing, too, and a
hostility with no motivation emerged from it. And then the many friends of my
in-laws, so available on the day of the wedding, had never showed up again,
nor did Pietro have any intention of seeing them. I felt alone and fragile. I
bought some books on how to become a perfect mother and prepared with my
usual diligence.
Days passed, weeks, but, surprisingly, the pregnancy didn’t weigh on me at
all; in fact it made me feel light. The nausea was negligible, I felt no breakdown
in my body, in my mood, in the wish to be active. I was in the fourth month
when my book received an important prize that brought me greater fame and
a little more money. I went to the prize ceremony in spite of the political
climate, which was hostile to that type of recognition, feeling that I was in a
state of grace; I was proud of myself, with a sense of physical and intellectual
fullness  that  made  me  bold,  expansive.  In  the  thank-you  speech  I  went
overboard, I said I felt as happy as the astronauts on the white expanse of the
moon. A couple of days later, since I felt strong, I telephoned Lila to tell her
about the prize. I wanted to let her know that things were not going as she had
predicted, that in fact they were going smoothly, that I was satisfied. I felt so
pleased with myself that I wanted to skip over the unhappiness she had caused
me. But Lila had read in Il Mattino—only the Naples papers had devoted a few
lines  to  the  prize—that  phrase  of  mine  about  the  astronauts,  and,  without
giving me time to speak, she criticized me harshly. The white expanse of the
moon, she said ironically, sometimes it’s better to say nothing than to talk
nonsense. And she added that the moon was a rock among billions of other
rocks, and that, as far as rocks go, the best thing was to stand with your feet
planted firmly in the troubles of the earth.
I felt a viselike grip in my stomach. Why did she continue to wound me?
Didn’t  she  want  me  to  be  happy?  Or  maybe  she  hadn’t  recovered  and  her
illness had heightened her mean side? Bitter words came to me, but I couldn’t
utter them. As if she didn’t even realize she had hurt me, or as if she felt she
had the right, she went on to tell me what was happening to her, in a very
friendly tone. She had made peace with her brother, with her mother, even
with her father; she had quarreled with Michele Solara on the old matter of the
label on the shoes and the money he owed Rino; she had been in touch with
Stefano to claim that, at least from the economic point of view, he should act as
Gennaro’s  father,  too,  and  not  just  Maria’s.  Her  remarks  were  irascible,
sometimes vulgar: against Rino, the Solaras, Stefano. And at the end she asked,
as if she had an urgent need for my opinion: Did I do the right thing? I didn’t
answer. I had won an important prize and she had mentioned only that phrase
about the astronauts. I asked her, maybe to offend her, if she still had those
symptoms that unglued her head from her body. She said no, she repeated a
couple of times that she was very well, she said with a mocking laugh: Only,
sometimes  out  of  the  corner  of  my  eye  I  see  people  coming  out  of  the
furniture.  Then  she  asked  me:  Is  everything  all  right  with  the  pregnancy?
Good, very good, I said, never felt better.
I  traveled  a  lot  in  those  months.  I  was  invited  here  and  there  not  only
because of my book but also because of the articles I was writing, which in turn
forced me to travel to see close up the new kinds of strike, the reactions of the
owners. I never thought of trying to become a freelance journalist. I did it
because doing it I was happy. I felt disobedient, in revolt and inflated with such
power that my meekness seemed a disguise. In fact it enabled me to join the
pickets in front of the factories, to talk to workers, both men and women, and
to union officials, to slip out among the policemen. Nothing frightened me.
When the Banca di Agricoltura in Milan was bombed I was in the city, at the
publisher’s, but I wasn’t alarmed, I didn’t have dark presentiments. I thought of
myself as part of an unstoppable force, I thought I was invulnerable. No one
could hurt me and my child. We two were the only enduring reality, I visible
and he (or she: but Pietro wanted a boy) for now invisible. The rest was a flow
of air, an immaterial wave of images and sounds that, whether disastrous or
beneficial, constituted material for my work. It passed by or it loomed so that I
could put it into magic words in a story, an article, a speech, taking care that
nothing  ended  up  outside  the  frame,  and  that  every  concept  pleased  the
Airotas, the publishing house, Nino, who surely somewhere was reading me,
even Pasquale, why not, and Nadia, and Lila, all of whom would finally have to
think:  Look,  we  were  wrong  about  Lena,  she’s  on  our  side,  see  what  she’s
writing.
It was a particularly intense time, that period of the pregnancy. It surprised
me  that  being  pregnant  made  me  more  eager  to  make  love.  It  was  I  who
initiated it, embraced Pietro, kissing him, even though he had no interest in
kissing and began almost immediately to make love in that prolonged, painful
way of his. Afterward he got up and worked until late. I slept for an hour or
two, then I woke up, found him gone, turned on the light, and read until I was
tired. Then I went to his room, insisted that he come to bed. He obeyed, but he
got up early: sleep seemed to frighten him. Whereas I slept until midday.
There was only one event that distressed me. I was in my seventh month
and my belly was heavy. I was outside the Nuovo Pignone factory when scuffles
broke out, and I hurried away. Maybe I made a wrong movement, I don’t know,
I felt a painful spasm in the center of my right buttock that extended along my
leg like a hot wire. I limped home, went to bed, and it passed. But every so
often the pain reappeared, radiating through my thigh toward my groin. I
learned to respond by finding positions that alleviated it, but when I realized
that  I  was  starting  to  limp  all  the  time  I  was  terrified,  and  I  went  to  the
gynecologist. He reassured me, saying that everything was in order, the weight
I was carrying in my womb tired me out, causing this slight sciatica. Why are
you so worried, he asked in an affectionate tone, you’re such a serene person. I
lied, I said I didn’t know. In reality I knew perfectly well: I was afraid that my
mother’s gait had caught up with me, that she had settled in my body, that I
would limp forever, like her.
I was soothed by the reassurances of the gynecologist; the pain lasted for a
while longer, then disappeared. Pietro forbade me to do other foolish things,
no  more  running  around.  I  admitted  that  he  was  right,  and  spent  the  last
weeks of my pregnancy reading; I wrote almost nothing. Our daughter was
born on February 12, 1970, at five-twenty in the morning. We called her Adele,
even though my mother-in-law kept repeating, poor child, Adele is a terrible
name, give her any other name, but not that. I had atrocious labor pains, but
they didn’t last long. When the baby emerged and I saw her, black-haired, a
violet  organism  that,  full  of  energy,  writhed  and  wailed,  I  felt  a  physical
pleasure so piercing that I still know no other pleasure that compares to it. We
didn’t baptize her; my mother screamed terrible things on the telephone, she
swore she would never come to see her. She’ll calm down, I thought, sadly, and
anyway if she doesn’t it’s her loss.
As soon as I was back on my feet I telephoned Lila, I didn’t want her to be
angry that I hadn’t told her anything.
“It was a wonderful experience,” I told her.
“What?”
“The pregnancy, the birth. Adele is beautiful, and very good.”
She answered: “Each of us narrates our life as it suits us.”
64.
What a tangle of threads with untraceable origins I discovered in myself in
that period. They were old and faded, very new, sometimes bright-colored,
sometimes colorless, extremely thin, almost invisible. That state of well-being
ended  suddenly,  just  when  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  had  escaped  Lila’s
prophecies. The baby became troublesome, and the oldest parts of that jumble
surfaced as if stirred by a distracted gesture. At first, when we were still in the
clinic,  she  attached  herself  easily  to  my  breast,  but  once  we  were  home
something went wrong and she didn’t want me anymore. She sucked for a few
seconds, then shrieked like a furious little animal. I felt weak, vulnerable to old
superstitions. What was happening to her? Were my nipples too small, did they
slip  out?  Did  she  not  like  my  milk?  Or  was  it  an  aversion  toward  me,  her
mother, had she been inoculated remotely with an evil spell?
An ordeal began, as we went from doctor to doctor, she and I alone; Pietro
was always busy at the university. My bosom, swollen uselessly, hurt; I had
burning stones in my breasts; I imagined infections, amputations. To empty
them, to get enough milk to nourish the baby with a bottle, to alleviate the
pain, I tortured myself with a breast pump. I whispered, coaxing her: come on,
sweetie, suck, such a good baby, so sweet, what a dear little mouth, what dear
little eyes, what’s the matter. In vain. First I decided, regretfully, to try mixed
feeding, then  I  gave  up on  that,  too.  I tried  artificial  milk,  which  required
lengthy preparations night and day, a tiresome system of sterilizing nipples
and bottles, an obsessive check of her weight before and after feeding, a sense
of guilt every time she had diarrhea. Sometimes I thought of Silvia, who, in the
turbulent  atmosphere  of  the  student  gathering  in  Milan,  breast-fed  Nino’s
child, Mirko, so easily. Why not me? I suffered long secret crying spells.
For a few days the baby settled down. I was relieved, hoping the moment
had arrived to get my life back in order. But the reprieve lasted less than a
week. In her first year of life the baby barely closed her eyes; her tiny body
writhed and screamed for hours, with an unsuspected energy and endurance.
She was quiet only if I carried her around the house, holding her tight in my
arms, speaking to her: Now mamma’s splendid creature is good, now she’s
quiet,  now  she’s  resting,  now  she’s  sleeping.  But  the  splendid  creature
wouldn’t sleep, she seemed to fear sleep, like her father. What was wrong: a
stomach ache, hunger, fear of abandonment because I hadn’t breast-fed her,
the evil eye, a demon that had entered her body? And what was wrong with
me? What poison had polluted my milk? And the leg? Was it imagination or
was the pain returning? My mother’s fault? Did she want to punish me because
I had been trying all my life not to be like her? Or was there something else?
One night I seemed to hear the sound of Gigliola’s voice, faint, repeating
throughout  the  neighborhood  that  Lila  had  a  tremendous  power,  that  she
could cast an evil spell by fire, that she smothered the creatures in her belly. I
was ashamed of myself, I tried to resist, I needed rest. So I tried leaving the
baby to Pietro, who thanks to his habit of studying at night wasn’t so tired. I
said: I’m exhausted, call me in a couple of hours, and I went to bed and fell
asleep as if I had lost consciousness. But once I was wakened by the baby’s
desperate wailing, I waited; it didn’t stop. I got up. I discovered that Pietro had
dragged the crib into his study and, paying no attention to his daughter’s cries,
was bent over his books, taking notes as if he were deaf. I lost all my manners,
and  regressed,  insulting  him  in  my  dialect.  You  don’t  give  a  damn  about
anything,  that  stuff  is  more  important  than  your  daughter?  My  husband,
distant,  cool,  asked  me  to  leave  the  room,  take  away  the  crib.  He  had  an
important article to finish for an English journal, the deadline was very near.
From then on I stopped asking him for help and if he offered I said: Go on,
thanks,  I  know  you  have  things  to  do.  After  dinner  he  hung  around  me
uncertain, awkward, then he closed himself in his study and worked until late
at night.
65.
I felt abandoned but with the impression that I deserved it: I wasn’t capable
of  providing  tranquility  for  my  daughter.  Yet  I  kept  going,  doggedly,  even
though I was more and more frightened. My organism was rejecting the role of
mother. And no matter how I denied the pain in my leg by doing everything
possible to ignore it, it had returned, and was getting worse. But I persisted, I
wore  myself  out  taking  charge  of  everything.  Since  the  building  had  no
elevator,  I  carried  the  stroller  with  the  baby  in  it  up  and  down,  I  did  the
shopping, came home loaded down with bags, I cleaned the house, I cooked, I
thought: I’m becoming ugly and old before my time, like the women of the
neighborhood.  And  naturally,  just  when  I  was  particularly  desperate,  Lila
telephoned.
As soon as I heard her voice I felt like yelling at her: What have you done to
me,  everything  was  going  smoothly  and  now,  suddenly,  what  you  said  is
happening,  the  baby  is  sick,  I’m  limping,  it’s  impossible,  I  can’t  bear  it
anymore. But I managed to restrain myself in time, I said quietly, everything’s
fine, the baby’s a little fussy and right now she’s not growing much, but she’s
wonderful,  I’m  happy.  Then,  with  feigned  interest,  I  asked  about  Enzo,
Gennaro, her relations with Stefano, her brother, the neighborhood, if she had
had other problems with Bruno Soccavo and Michele. She answered in an ugly,
obscene, aggressive dialect, but mostly without rage. Soccavo, she said, has to
bleed. And when I run into Michele I spit in his face. As for Gennaro, she now
referred to him explicitly as Stefano’s son, saying, he’s stocky like his father,
and she laughed when I said he’s such a nice little boy. She said: You’re such a
good little mamma, you take him. In those phrases I heard the sarcasm of
someone who knew, thanks to some mysterious secret power, what was really
happening to me, and I felt rancor, but I became even more insistent with my
charade—listen to what a sweet voice Dede has, it’s really pleasant here in
Florence, I’m reading an interesting book by Baran—and I kept going until she
forced me to end it by telling me about the IBM course that Enzo had started.
Only of him did she speak with respect, at length, and right afterward she
asked about Pietro.
“Everything’s going well with your husband?”
“Very well.”
“And for me with Enzo.”
When she hung up, her voice left a trail of images and sounds of the past
that stayed in my mind for hours: the courtyard, the dangerous games, the doll
she had thrown into the cellar, the dark stairs we climbed to Don Achille’s to
retrieve it, her wedding, her generosity and her meanness, how she had taken
Nino. She can’t tolerate my good fortune, I thought fearfully, she wants me
with  her  again,  under  her,  supporting  her  in  her  affairs,  in  her  wretched
neighborhood wars. Then I said to myself: How stupid I’ve been, what use has
my  education  been,  and  I  pretended  everything  was  under  control.  To  my
sister Elisa, who called frequently, I said that being a mother was wonderful. To
Carmen Peluso, who told me about her marriage to the gas-pump owner on the
stradone, I responded: What good news, I wish you every happiness, say hello to
Pasquale,  what’s  he  up  to.  With  my  mother,  the  rare  times  she  called,  I
pretended I was ecstatic, but once I broke down and asked her: What happened
to your leg, why do you limp. She answered: What does it matter to you, mind
your own business.
I  struggled  for  months,  trying  to  keep  at  bay  the  more  opaque  parts  of
myself.  Occasionally  I  surprised  myself  by  praying  to  the  Madonna,  even
though I considered myself an atheist, and was ashamed. More often, when I
was alone in the house with the baby, I let out terrible cries, not words, only
breath spilling out along with despair. But that difficult period wouldn’t end; it
was a grueling, tormented time. At night, I carried the baby up and down the
hall, limping. I no longer whispered sweet nonsense phrases, I ignored her and
tried to think of myself. I was always holding a book, a journal, even though I
hardly managed to read anything. During the day, when Adele slept peacefully
—at first I called her Ade, without realizing how it sounded like Hades, a hell
summed  up  in  two  syllables,  so  that  when  Pietro  pointed  it  out  I  was
embarrassed and began calling her Dede—I tried to write for the newspaper.
But I no longer had time—and certainly not the desire—to travel around on
behalf  of  l’Unità.  So  the  things  I  wrote  had  no  energy,  they  were  merely
demonstrations of my formal skill, flourishes lacking substance. Once, having
written an article, I had Pietro read it before dictating it to the editorial office.
He said: “It’s empty.”
“In what sense?”
“It’s just words.”
I felt offended, and dictated it just the same. It wasn’t published. And from
then  on,  with  a  certain  embarrassment,  both  the  local  and  the  national
editorial offices began to reject my texts, citing problems of space. I suffered, I
felt  that  everything  that  up  to  a  short  time  earlier  I  had  taken  as  an
unquestioned condition of life and work was rapidly collapsing around me, as if
violently jolted from inaccessible depths. I read just to keep my eyes on a book
or a newspaper, but it was as if I had stopped at the signs and no longer had
access to the meanings. Two or three times I came across articles by Nino, but
reading them didn’t give me the usual pleasure of imagining him, of hearing
his voice, of enjoying his thoughts. I was happy for him, certainly: if he was
writing it meant that he was well, he was living his life who knows where, with
who knows whom. But I stared at the signature, I read a few lines, I retreated,
as if every one of his sentences, black on white, made my situation even more
unbearable.  I  lost  interest  in  things,  I  couldn’t  even  bother  with  my
appearance. And besides, for whom would I bother? I saw no one, only Pietro,
who treated me courteously, but I perceived that for him I was a shadow. At
times I seemed to think with his mind and I imagined I felt his unhappiness.
Marrying me had only complicated his existence as a scholar, and just when his
fame was growing, especially in England and the United States. I admired him,
and yet he irritated me. I always spoke to him with a mixture of resentment
and inferiority.
Stop it, I ordered myself one day, forget l’Unità, it will be enough if I can find
the right approach for a new book: as soon as it’s done, everything will be in
order. But what book? To my mother-in law, to the publisher, I claimed that I
was at a good point, but I was lying, I lied on every occasion in the friendliest
tones. In fact all I had was notebooks crammed with idle notes, nothing else.
And when I opened them, at night or during the day, according to the schedule
that Dede imposed on me, I fell asleep without realizing it. One late afternoon
Pietro returned from the university and found me in a condition worse than
the one I had surprised him in some time earlier: I was in the kitchen, fast
sleep, with my head resting on the table; the baby had missed her feeding and
was  screaming,  off  in  the  bedroom.  Her  father  found  her  in  the  crib,  half
naked, forgotten. When Dede calmed down, greedily attached to the bottle,
Pietro said in despair: “Is it possible that you don’t have anyone who could
help you?”
“Not in this city, and you know that perfectly well.”
“Have your mother come, your sister.”
“I don’t want to.”
“Then ask your friend in Naples: you did so much for her, she’ll do the same
for you.”
I started. For a fraction of a second, part of me had the clear sensation that
Lila was in the house already, present: if once she had been hiding inside me,
now, with her narrow eyes, her furrowed brow, she had slipped into Dede. I
shook my head energetically. Get rid of that image, that possibility, what was I
looking onto?
Pietro resigned himself to calling his mother. Reluctantly he asked her if she
could come and stay with us for a little while.
66.
I entrusted myself to my mother-in-law with an immediate sense of relief,
and  here,  too,  she  showed  herself  to  be  the  woman  I  would  have  liked  to
resemble. In the space of a few days she found a big girl named Clelia, barely
twenty,  and  originally  from  the  Maremma,  to  whom  she  gave  detailed
instructions about taking care of the house, the shopping, the cooking. When
Pietro found Clelia in the house without even having been consulted he made a
gesture of annoyance.
“I don’t want slaves in my house,” he said.
Adele answered calmly: “She’s not a slave, she’s a salaried employee.”
And I, fortified by the presence of my mother-in-law, stammered: “Do you
think I should be a slave?”
“You’re a mother, not a slave.”
“I wash and iron your clothes, I clean the house, I cook for you, I’ve given
you a daughter, I bring her up in the midst of endless difficulties, I’m worn
out.”
“And who makes you do that, have I ever asked you for anything?”
I couldn’t bear to argue, but Adele did, she crushed her son with a sometimes
ferocious sarcasm, and Clelia remained. Then she took the child away from me,
carried the crib into the room I had given her, managed with great precision
the schedule of bottles both at night and during the day. When she noticed
that I was limping, she took me to a doctor, a friend of hers, who prescribed
various injections. She herself appeared every morning and every evening with
the syringe and the vials, to blithely stick the needle into my buttocks. I felt
better right away, the pain in my leg disappeared, my mood improved, I was
happier.  But  Adele  didn’t  stop  there.  She  politely  insisted  that  I  attend  to
myself, she sent me to the hairdresser, made me go back to the dentist. And
above all she talked to me constantly about the theater, the cinema, a book she
was translating, another she was editing, what her husband or other famous
people whom she called familiarly by name had written in this or that journal.
From  her  I  heard  for  the  first  time  about  the  new  radical  feminist  tracts.
Mariarosa knew the women who were writing them; she was infatuated with
them, admired them. Not Adele. She said with her usual ironic attitude that
they went on and on about the feminist question as if it could be dealt with
separately from the class conflict. Read them anyway, she advised me, and left
me a couple of those little volumes with a final cryptic phrase: Don’t miss
anything, if you want to be a writer. I put them aside, I didn’t want to waste
time with writings that Adele herself disparaged. But I also felt, just then, that
in no way did my mother-in-law’s cultivated conversation arise from a true
need to exchange ideas with me. Adele intended to systematically pull me out
of  the  desperate  state  of  an  incompetent  mother,  she  was  rubbing  words
together to strike a spark and rekindle my frozen mind, my frozen gaze. But
the truth was that she liked saving me more than listening to me.
And yet. Yet Dede, in spite of everything, continued to cry at night, I heard
her and became agitated, she gave off a sense of unhappiness that undid the
beneficial  action  of  my  mother-in-law.  And  though  I  had  more  time  I  still
couldn’t write. And Pietro, who was usually controlled, in the presence of his
mother became uninhibited to the point of rudeness; his return home was
almost always followed by an aggressive exchange of sarcastic remarks, and
this only increased the sense of breakdown I felt around me. My husband—I
soon realized—found it natural to consider Adele ultimately responsible for all
his problems. He got angry with her for everything, even what happened to
him at work. I knew almost nothing about the wearing tensions that he was
experiencing at the university; in general to my how are things he responded
fine, he tended to spare me. But with his mother the barriers broke down; he
assumed the recriminatory tone of the child who feels neglected. He poured
out onto Adele everything he hid from me, and if I was present he acted as if I
weren’t, as if I, his wife, were to act only as silent witness.
Thus many things became clear to me. His colleagues, all older than him,
attributed  his  dazzling  career,  as  well  as  the  small  reputation  that  he  was
starting to develop abroad, to the name he bore, and had isolated him. The
students considered him unnecessarily rigid, a pedantic bourgeois who tended
his own plot without making any concession to the chaos of the present, in
other words a class enemy. And he, as usual, neither defended himself nor
attacked, but kept straight on his path, offering—of this I was sure—lectures of
acute intelligence, assessing students’ abilities with equal acuity, failing them.
But it’s hard, he almost shouted at Adele, one evening, in a tone of complaint.
Then he immediately lowered his voice, said that he needed tranquility, that
the job was a struggle, that no small number of his colleagues set the students
against him, that groups of youths often erupted into the classroom where he
was teaching and forced him to break off the classes, that despicable slogans
had appeared on the walls. At that point, even before Adele could speak, I lost
control.  If  you  were  a  little  less  reactionary,  I  said,  those  things  wouldn’t
happen to you. And he, for the first time since I’d known him, answered rudely,
hissing: Shut up, you always speak in clichés.
I locked myself in the bathroom and I suddenly realized that I scarcely knew
him. What did I know about him? He was a peaceful man but determined to the
point  of  stubbornness.  He  was  on  the  side  of  the  working  class  and  the
students, but he taught and gave exams in the most traditional way. He was an
atheist, he hadn’t wanted to get married in a church, he had insisted that Dede
not  be  baptized,  but  he  admired  the  early  Christian  communities  of  the
Oltrarno and he spoke on religious matters with great expertise. He was an
Airota, but he couldn’t bear the privileges and comforts that came from that. I
calmed down, I tried to be closer to him, more affectionate. He’s my husband, I
said  to  myself,  we  ought  to  talk  more.  But  Adele’s  presence  became
increasingly  problematic.  There  was  something  unexpressed  between  them
that drove Pietro to set aside manners and Adele to speak to him as if he were a
fool with no hope of redemption.
We lived now like that, amid constant battles: he quarreled with his mother,
he ended up saying something that made me angry, I attacked him. Until the
point came when my mother-in-law, at dinner, in my presence, asked him why
he was sleeping on the sofa. He answered: It’s better if you leave tomorrow. I
didn’t intervene, and yet I knew why he slept on the sofa: he did it for me, so
that  he  wouldn’t  disturb  me  when,  around  three,  he  stopped  working  and
allowed himself some rest. The next day Adele returned to Genoa. I felt lost.
67.
Nevertheless, the months passed and both the baby and I made it. Dede
started walking by herself the day of her first birthday: her father squatted in
front  of  her,  encouraged  her  warmly,  she  smiled,  left  me,  and  moved
unsteadily toward him, arms outstretched, mouth half open, as if it were the
happy goal of her year of crying. From then on, her nights became tranquil,
and so did mine. She spent more time with Clelia, her anxieties diminished, I
carved out some space for myself. But I discovered that I had no desire for
demanding activities. As after a long illness, I couldn’t wait to go outside, enjoy
the sun and the colors, walk on the crowded streets, look in the shop windows.
And since I had some money of my own, in that period I bought clothes for
myself, for the baby, and for Pietro, I crowded the house with furniture and
knickknacks, I squandered money as I never had before. I felt the need to be
pretty, to meet interesting people, have conversations, but I hadn’t made any
friends, and Pietro, for his part, rarely brought guests home.
I tried gradually to resume the satisfying life I had had until a year before,
and only then noticed that the telephone hardly ever rang, that the calls for
me were rare. The memory of my novel was fading and, with it, interest in my
name was diminishing. That period of euphoria was followed by a phase of
anxiety  and,  occasionally,  depression,  as  I  wondered  what  to  do;  I  began
reading contemporary literature again, and was often ashamed of my novel,
which in comparison seemed frivolous and very traditional; I put aside the
notes for the new book, which tended to repeat the old one, and made an effort
to think of a story with more political engagement, one that would contain the
tumult of the present.
I made a few timid phone calls to l’Unità and tried again to write articles, but
I soon realized that my pieces no longer appealed to the editors. I had lost
ground, I wasn’t well informed, I didn’t have time to go and examine particular
situations and report on them, I wrote elegant sentences of an abstract rigor to
announce—in that particular newspaper, to whom I’m not sure—my support of
the harshest criticisms of the Communist Party and the unions. Today it’s hard
to  explain  why  I  insisted  on  writing  that  stuff  or,  rather,  why,  although  I
scarcely took part in the city’s political life, and in spite of my meekness, I felt
increasingly drawn to extreme positions. Maybe I did it out of insecurity. Or
maybe  out  of  distrust  in  every  form  of  mediation,  a  skill  that,  from  early
childhood, I associated with the intrigues of my father, who operated shrewdly
in the inefficiency of the city hall. Or out of the vivid knowledge of poverty,
which I felt an obligation not to forget; I wanted to be on the side of those who
remained downtrodden and were fighting to turn everything upside down. Or
because everyday politics, the demands that I myself had scrupulously written
about, didn’t matter to me, I wished that something great—I had used and often
did  use  that  formulation—would  break  out,  which  I  could  experience,  and
report on. Or because—and this was hard to admit—my model remained Lila,
with her stubborn unreasonableness that refused to accept half measures, so
that although I was now distant from her in every way, I wanted to say and do
what I imagined she would say and do if she had had my tools, if she had not
confined herself within the space of the neighborhood.
I stopped buying l’Unità, I began to read Lotta Continua and Il Manifesto. In the
latter, I discovered, Nino’s name sometimes appeared. His articles were, as
usual, well documented, and shaped with cogent logic. As I had when I talked
to  him  as  a  girl,  I,  too,  felt  the  need  to  contain  myself  in  a  network  of
deliberately  formulated  general  propositions  that  would  keep  me  from
breaking down. I noticed that I no longer thought of him with desire, or even
with love. He had become, it seemed to me, a figure of regret, the synthesis of
what I was at risk of not becoming, even though I had had the opportunity. We
were born in the same environment, both had brilliantly got out of it. Why
then was I sliding into despair? Because of marriage? Because of motherhood
and Dede? Because I was a woman, because I had to take care of house and
family and clean up shit and change diapers? Every time I came upon an article
by Nino, and the article seemed well done, I was resentful. And the person who
paid for it was Pietro, in fact the only person I had to talk to. I got angry at him,
I accused him of abandoning me in the most terrible period of my life, of caring
only about his career and forgetting me. Our relations—I had trouble admitting
it because it frightened me, but that was the reality—got worse and worse. I
knew that he suffered because of his problems at work, and yet I couldn’t
forgive him, rather I criticized him, often starting from political positions no
different from those of the students who made things so hard for him. He
listened to me uneasily, scarcely responding. I suspected, in those moments,
that the words he had shouted before (shut up, you speak in clichés) hadn’t been
an accidental loss of temper but indicated that in general he didn’t consider me
capable of a serious discussion. It exasperated me, depressed me, my rancor
increased,  especially  because  I  myself  knew  that  I  wavered  between
contradictory feelings whose essence could be summed up like this: it was
inequality that made school laborious for some (me, for example), and almost a
game for others (Pietro, for example); on the other hand, inequality or not, one
had to study, and do well, in fact very well—I was proud of my journey, of the
intelligence I had demonstrated, and I refused to believe that my labor had
been in vain, if in certain ways obtuse. And yet, for obscure reasons, with
Pietro I gave expression only to the injustice of inequality. I said to him: You
act as if all your students were the same, but it’s not like that, it’s a form of
sadism  to  insist  on  the  same  results  from  kids  who  haven’t  had  the  same
opportunities. And I even criticized him when he reported that he’d had a
violent  discussion  with  a  colleague  some  twenty  years  his  senior,  an
acquaintance of his sister’s, who had thought he would find in him an ally
against the most conservative part of the faculty. It happened that that man
had in a friendly way advised him to be less severe with the students. Pietro
had replied in his polite but un-nuanced way that he didn’t think he was severe
but only demanding. Well, the other had said, be less demanding, especially
with the ones who are generously spending a lot of their time changing the
current situation. At that point things came to a head, although I don’t know
exactly how or based on what arguments. Pietro, whose account was as usual
minimal, first maintained that he had said only, in self-defense, that it was his
habit always to treat all students with the respect that they deserved; then he
admitted  he  had  accused  his  colleague  of  using  a  double  standard,  of
accommodating the students who were more aggressive and ruthless and even
humiliating the more fearful ones. The man had taken offense, had gone so far
as to say that only the fact that he knew his sister well prevented him from
telling Pietro—and meanwhile, however, he had told him—that he was a fool
unworthy of the professorship he held.
“Couldn’t you be more cautious?”
“I am cautious.”
“It doesn’t seem that way to me.”
“Well, I have to say what I think.”
“Maybe  you  should  find  out  who  are  your  friends  and  who  are  your
enemies.”
“I don’t have enemies.”
“Or friends, either.”
One thing leads to another—I overdid it. The result of your behavior, I hissed
at him, is that no one in this city, least of all the friends of your parents, invites
us to dinner or a concert or for a visit to the country.
68.
It was evident to me now that Pietro, at the university, was considered a dull
man, very remote from the keen activism of his family, an unsuccessful Airota.
And I shared that opinion, something that did not help our life in common or
our intimate relations. When Dede finally settled down and began to sleep
regularly,  he  returned  to  our  bed,  but  as  soon  as  he  approached  me  I  felt
irritated, I was afraid of getting pregnant again, I wanted him to let me sleep.
So I pushed him away, wordlessly, or simply turned my back, and if he insisted
and pressed his sex against my nightgown, I hit his leg gently with my heel, a
signal: I don’t want to, I’m sleepy. Pietro retreated unhappily, he got up and
went to his study.
One night we argued yet again about Clelia. There was always some tension
when we had to pay her, but on that occasion it was clear that Clelia was an
excuse. He said somberly: Elena, we have to examine our relationship and take
stock. I agreed immediately. I told him that I adored his intelligence and his
civility, that Dede was marvelous, but I added that I didn’t want more children,
I found the isolation I had ended up in unbearable, I wanted to return to an
active life, I hadn’t slaved since childhood just to be imprisoned in the roles of
wife and mother. We talked, I bitterly, he with courtesy. He stopped protesting
about Clelia, he gave in. He decided to buy condoms, he began to invite friends
or, rather, acquaintances—he didn’t have any friends—to dinner, he resigned
himself to my going sometimes with Dede to meetings and demonstrations, in
spite of the increasingly frequent violence in the streets.
But that new course, rather than improving my life, complicated it. Dede
became more attached to Clelia and when I took her out she was bored, she got
upset, she pulled my ears, my hair, my nose, tearfully begging for her. I was
convinced that she was happier with the girl from the Maremma than with me,
and the suspicion returned that because I hadn’t breast-fed her and her first
year of life had been hard, I was now a dark figure in her eyes, the mean
woman who was constantly scolding her, and who, out of jealousy, mistreated
her cheerful nanny, a playmate, a storyteller. She pushed me away even when
with a mechanical gesture I wiped the snot off her nose with a handkerchief or
the remains of food off her mouth. She cried, she said I was hurting her.
As for Pietro, the condoms dulled his sensitivity even more, and it took him
even longer to reach orgasm, which made him suffer, and made me suffer.
Sometimes I made him take me from behind, I had the impression that it was
less painful, and while he dealt those violent blows I grabbed his hand and
brought it to my sex hoping he would understand that I wanted to be caressed.
But he seemed incapable of doing both things, and since he preferred the first
he almost immediately forgot the second, nor, once satisfied, did he seem to
understand that I wanted some part of his body to consummate, in turn, my
desire. After he had had his pleasure he caressed my hair, and whispered, I’ll
work a little. When he left, the solitude seemed to me a consolation prize.
Sometimes, at the demonstrations, I observed with curiosity the young men
who exposed themselves fearlessly to every danger, who were charged with a
joyful energy even when they felt threatened and became threatening. I felt
their fascination, I was attracted by that fever heat. But I considered myself
remote in every way from the bright girls who surrounded them, I was too
cultured, wore glasses, was married, my time was always limited. I returned
home unhappy, I treated my husband coldly, I felt I was already old. A few
times  I  daydreamed  that  one  of  those  young  men—he  was  well  known  in
Florence,  very  popular—noticed  me  and  dragged  me  away,  as  when,  in
adolescence, I felt clumsy and wouldn’t dance, but Antonio or Pasquale would
take me by the arm and force me. Naturally it never happened. Rather, it was
the acquaintances Pietro began to bring home who created complications. I
labored to prepare dinners, I played the wife who can keep the conversation
interesting, and I didn’t complain, I had asked my husband to invite people.
But I soon perceived, uneasily, that that ritual was not complete in itself: I was
attracted by any man who gave me the slightest encouragement. Tall, short,
thin, fat, ugly, handsome, old, married or a bachelor, if the guest praised an
observation of mine, if he had nice things to say about my book, if he grew
excited by my intelligence, I looked at him cordially and in a brief exchange of
phrases and glances my availability communicated itself. Then the man, bored
at the start, became lively, ignoring Pietro, redoubling his attentions to me. His
words  grew  more  allusive,  and  his  gestures,  his  attitude  in  the  course  of
conversation gained intimacy. With his fingertips he grazed my shoulder, my
hand, looked into my eyes formulating sentimental phrases, touched my knees
with his, the tips of my shoes with his shoes.
At those moments I felt good, I forgot the existence of Pietro and Dede, the
wake of boring obligations they trailed. I feared only the moment when the
guest  would  leave  and  I  would  fall  back  into  the  dreariness  of  my  house:
pointless days, idleness, rage concealed behind meekness. So I went overboard:
excitement goaded me to talk too much and too loudly, I crossed my legs,
hiking up my skirt as far as possible, with a careless gesture I unfastened a
button on my shirt. It was I who shortened the distances, as if a part of me
were convinced that, if in some way I clung to that stranger, some of the well-
being I felt at that moment would remain in my body, and when he had left the
apartment, along with his wife or companion, I would feel the depression, the
emptiness behind the display of feelings and ideas, the anguish of failure.
In reality, afterward, alone in bed while Pietro studied, I felt simply stupid
and despised myself. But however I tried I couldn’t change myself. Especially
because  those  men  were  convinced  they  had  made  an  impression  and
generally called the next day, invented excuses to see me again. I accepted. But
as soon as I arrived at the appointment I was frightened. The simple fact that
they were excited, although they were, let’s say, thirty years older or were
married,  canceled  their  authority,  canceled  the  savior  role  I  had  assigned
them, and the very pleasure I had felt during the game of seduction was a
shameful mistake. I asked myself in bewilderment: Why did I behave like that,
what’s happening to me? I paid more attention to Dede and Pietro.
But at the first chance it all started again. I fantasized, I listened at high
volume to the music I had been ignorant of as a girl, I didn’t read, I didn’t write.
And  I  felt  increasingly  regretful  that,  because  of  my  self-discipline  in
everything, I had missed the joy of letting go that the women of my age, of the
milieu I now lived in, made a show of having enjoyed and enjoying. Whenever
Mariarosa,  for  example,  appeared  in  Florence,  sometimes  for  research,
sometimes  for  political  meetings,  she  came  to  stay  with  us,  always  with
different men, sometimes with girlfriends, and she took drugs, and offered
them to her companions and to us, and if Pietro darkened and shut himself in
his study, I was fascinated, and though hesitant to try smoking or LSD—I was
afraid I would feel sick—I stayed to talk to her and her friends until late into
the night.
They talked about everything; often the exchanges were violent, and I had
the impression that the good language I had struggled to acquire had become
inadequate. Too neat, too clean. Look how Mariarosa’s language has changed, I
thought, she’s broken with her upbringing, she’s got a dirty mouth. Pietro’s
sister now expressed herself more vulgarly than Lila and I had as girls. She
didn’t utter a noun that wasn’t preceded by “fucking.” Where did I put that
fucking match, where are the fucking cigarettes. Lila had never stopped talking like
that; so what was I supposed to do, become like her again, go back to the
starting point? Then why had I worn myself out?
I observed my sister-in-law. I liked how she displayed solidarity with me and
embarrassed her brother, instead, and the men she brought home. One night
she abruptly interrupted the conversation to say to the young man with her:
enough, let’s go fuck. Fuck. Pietro had invented a well-mannered child’s jargon
for sexual things, I had acquired it and used it in place of the vulgar dialect
vocabulary I had known since early childhood. But now, if one truly wanted to
feel part of the changing world, was it necessary to bring back the obscene
words, to say: I want to screw, fuck me this way and that way? Unimaginable
with  my  husband.  But  the  few  men  I  saw,  all  highly  educated,  willingly
pretended to be lower-class, were amused by women who acted like sluts, and
seemed to enjoy treating a woman like a whore. At first these men were very
formal, they controlled themselves. But they couldn’t wait to start a skirmish
that moved from the unsaid to the said, to the more explicitly said, in a game
of  freedom  where  female  shyness  was  considered  a  sign  of  hypocritical
foolishness.  Candor,  rather,  immediacy:  these  were  the  qualities  of  the
liberated woman, and I made an effort to live up to them. But the more I did,
the more I felt enthralled by my interlocutor. A couple of times it seemed to
me that I was falling in love.
69.
It  happened  first  with  a  lecturer  in  Greek  literature,  a  man  of  my  age,
originally from Asti, who had in his home town a fiancée with whom he said he
was unhappy; then with the husband of a temporary lecturer in papyrology, a
couple  with  two  small  children,  she  from  Catania,  he  from  Florence,  an
engineer who taught mechanics, named Mario, who was seven years older than
me. He had an extensive political education, a lot of authority in public, long
hair, and in his spare time he played drums in a rock band. With both, the
routine was the same: Pietro invited them to dinner, I began to flirt. Phone
calls, carefree participation in demonstrations, many walks, sometimes with
Dede,  sometimes  alone,  and  occasional  movies.  With  the  Greek  lecturer  I
retreated as soon as he became explicit. But Mario trapped me in a tightening
net and one evening, in his car, he kissed me, he kissed me for a long time and,
putting his hands in my bra, caressed my breasts. I pushed him away with
difficulty, I said I didn’t want to see him anymore. But he called, he called
again, I missed him, I gave in. Since he had kissed me and touched me, he was
sure he had some rights and behaved immediately as if we were starting up
again from the point where we had left off. He insisted, proposed, demanded.
When I, on the one hand, led him on and, on the other, dodged him, laughing,
he got offended, he offended me.
One morning I was walking with him and Dede, who, if I remember, was a
little over two and was completely absorbed by a beloved doll, Tes, a name she
had invented. In the circumstances, I was paying scarcely any attention to her,
carried away by the verbal game, and sometimes I forgot about her completely.
As for Mario, he gave no importance to the child’s presence, he was interested
only in keeping after me, with his uninhibited talk, and he turned to Dede to
whisper playfully in her ear things like: Please, will you tell your mamma to be
nice to me? The time flew, we parted, Dede and I headed home. But after a few
steps the child said harshly: Tes told me she has a secret to tell Papa. My heart
stopped in my chest. Tes? And what will she tell Papa? Tes knows. Something
good or bad? Bad. I threatened her: You explain to Tes that if she reports that
thing to Papa you will lock her up in the storeroom, in the dark. She burst into
tears, and I had to carry her home: she who, to please me, would walk and
walk, pretending that she never got tired. Dede understood, therefore, or at
least perceived, that between that man and me there was something that her
father wouldn’t tolerate.
I  again  broke  off  the  meetings  with  Mario.  What  was  he,  in  the  end?  A
middle-class man who liked pornographic wordplay. But I couldn’t control my
restlessness, an eagerness for violation was growing in me, I wanted to break
the rules, as the entire world seemed to be breaking the rules. I wanted, even
just once, to break out of marriage, or, why not, everything in my life, what I
had learned, what I had written, what I was trying to write, the child I had
brought into the world. Ah yes, marriage was a prison: Lila, who had courage,
had escaped at risk of her very life: and what risks did I run with Pietro, so
distracted, so absent? None. So? I called Mario. I left Dede to Clelia, I went to
his office. We kissed, he sucked my nipples, he touched me between the legs as
Antonio had at the ponds years before. But when he pulled down his pants and,
with his underpants at his knees, grabbed me by the neck and tried to push me
against his sex I wriggled free, said no, put myself in order, and rushed away.
I returned home in great agitation, filled with guilt. I made love with Pietro
passionately, I had never felt so rapt, it was I who said no to the condom. What
am I worried about, I said to myself, I’m near my period, nothing will happen.
But it did happen. Within a few weeks I found that I was pregnant again.
70.
With Pietro I didn’t even hint at abortion—he was very happy that I was
giving him another child—and, besides, I myself was afraid of trying that route,
the  very  word  made  my  stomach  hurt.  Adele  mentioned  abortion  on  the
telephone, but I immediately avoided the subject with stock phrases like: Dede
needs company, growing up alone is hard, it’s better for her to have a little
brother or sister.
“The book?”
“It’s going well,” I lied.
“Will you let me read it?”
“Of course.”
“We’re all waiting.”
“I know.”
I was panic-stricken, almost without thinking I made a move that astounded
Pietro, maybe even me. I telephoned my mother, I said I was expecting another
child, I asked if she wanted to come and stay in Florence for a while. She
muttered that she couldn’t, she had to take care of my father, of my siblings. I
shouted at her: It’ll be your fault if I don’t write anymore. Who gives a damn,
she answered, isn’t it enough for you to lead the life of a lady? And she hung
up. But five minutes later Elisa telephoned. I’ll take care of the household, she
said, Mamma will leave tomorrow.
Pietro picked up my mother at the station in the car, which made her proud,
made her feel loved. As soon as she set foot in the house I listed a series of
rules: Don’t move anything around in Pietro’s study or mine; don’t spoil Dede;
don’t interfere between me and my husband; supervise Clelia without fighting
with her; stay in the kitchen or your room if I have guests. I was resigned to the
idea that she wouldn’t respect any of those rules, but instead, as if the fear of
being sent away had modified her nature, she became within a few days a
devoted servant who provided for every necessity of the house and resolved
every problem decisively and efficiently without ever disturbing me or Pietro.
From time to time she went to Naples and her absence immediately made
me feel exposed to chance, I was afraid she would never return. But she always
did. She told me the news of the neighborhood (Carmen was pregnant, Marisa
had  had  a  boy,  Gigliola  was  giving  Michele  Solara  a  second  child;  she  said
nothing about Lila, to avoid conflict) and then she became a kind of invisible
household spirit who insured for all of us clean, ironed clothes, meals that
tasted of childhood, an apartment that was always tidy, an orderliness that, as
soon as it was disturbed, was put back in order with a maniacal punctuality.
Pietro  thought  of  trying  again  to  get  rid  of  Clelia  and  my  mother  was  in
agreement. I got angry, but instead of raging at my husband I lost my temper
with  her,  and  she  withdrew  into  her  room  without  responding.  Pietro
reproached me and made an effort to reconcile us quickly. He adored her, he
said she was a very intelligent woman, and he would sit in the kitchen with her
after dinner, chatting. Dede called her Grandma and grew so attached to her
that she was irritated when Clelia appeared. Now, I said to myself, everything
is in order, now you have no excuses. And I forced myself to focus on the book.
I looked at my notes again. I was absolutely convinced that I had to change
course. I wanted to leave behind me what Franco had called petty love affairs
and write something suited to a time of demonstrations, violent deaths, police
repression, fears of a coup d’état. I couldn’t get beyond a dozen inert pages.
What was missing, then? It was hard to say. Naples, maybe, the neighborhood.
Or an image like the Blue Fairy. Or a passion. Or an authoritative voice that
would direct me. I sat at the desk for hours, in vain, I leafed through novels, I
never went out of the room for fear of being captured by Dede. How unhappy I
was. I heard the voice of the child in the hall, Clelia’s, my mother’s limping
step. I lifted my skirt, I looked at the belly that was already starting to grow,
spreading an undesired well-being through my whole organism. I was for the
second time pregnant and yet empty.
71.
It was then that I began telephoning Lila, not sporadically, as I had until
then, but almost every day. I made the expensive intercity calls with the sole
purpose  of  crouching  in  her  shadow,  letting  my  pregnancy  run  its  course,
hoping that, in line with an old habit, she would set my imagination in motion.
Naturally  I  was  careful  not  to  say  the  wrong  things,  and  I  hoped  that  she
wouldn’t, either. I knew clearly, now, that our friendship was possible only if
we controlled our tongues. For example, I couldn’t confess to her that a dark
part of me feared that she was casting an evil spell on me from afar, that that
part  still  hoped  that  she  was  really  sick  and  would  die.  For  example,  she
couldn’t tell me the real reasons that motivated the rough, often offensive,
tone  in  which  she  treated  me.  So  we  confined  ourselves  to  talking  about
Gennaro, who was one of the smartest children in the elementary school, about
Dede, who already knew how to read, and we did it like two mothers doing the
normal boasting of mothers. Or I mentioned my attempt to write, but without
making a big deal of it, I said only: I’m working, it’s not easy, being pregnant
makes me tired. Or I tried to find out if Michele was still hanging around her, to
somehow capture her and keep her. Or, sometimes, I would ask if she liked
certain movie or television actors, and urge her to tell me if men unlike Enzo
attracted her, and perhaps confide to her that it happened to me, too, that I
was attracted to men unlike Pietro. But this last subject didn’t seem to interest
her. When I mentioned an actor she always said: Who’s he, I’ve never seen him
in the movies or on television. And if I merely uttered the name of Enzo she
began  updating  me  on  the  computer  story,  bewildering  me  with  an
incomprehensible jargon.
Her accounts were enthusiastic, and occasionally, on the hypothesis that
they might be useful to me in the future, I took notes while she spoke. Enzo
had made it, now he worked in an underwear factory fifty kilometers from
Naples. The company had rented an IBM machine and he was the systems
engineer. You know what kind of work that is? He diagrams manual processes
by transforming them into flow charts. The central unit of the machine is as
big as a wardrobe with three doors and it has a memory of 8 kilobytes. You
can’t  imagine  how  hot  it  is,  Lenù:  the  computer  is  worse  than  a  stove.
Maximum abstraction along with sweat and a terrible stink. She talked to me
about  ferrite  cores,  rings  traversed  by  an  electrical  cable  whose  tension
determined the rotation, 0 or 1, and a ring was a bit, and the total of eight rings
could represent a byte, that is a character. Enzo was the singular protagonist of
Lila’s monologues. He dominated all that material like a god, he manipulated
the vocabulary and the substance inside a large room with big air-conditioners,
a hero who could make the machine do everything that people did. Is that
clear? she asked me every so often. I answered yes, weakly, but I didn’t know
what she was talking about. I perceived only that she noticed that nothing was
clear to me, and I was ashamed of this.
Her  enthusiasm  grew  with  every  phone  call.  Enzo  was  now  earning  a
hundred and forty-eight thousand lire a month, exactly, a hundred and forty-
eight. Because he was so smart, the most intelligent man she had ever met. So
smart, so clever, that he had soon become indispensable and had managed to
get her hired, as an assistant. Here, this was the news: Lila was working again,
and this time she liked it. He’s the boss, Lenù, and I’m the deputy. I leave
Gennaro  with  my  mother—sometimes  even  with  Stefano—and  I  go  to  the
factory every morning. Enzo and I study the company point by point. We do
everything  the  employees  do  so  we  know  what  we  have  to  put  into  the
computer. We check off, I don’t know, the transactions, we attach the stamps
to the invoices, we check the trainees’ cards, the time cards, and then we
transform everything into diagrams and holes in cards. Yes, yes, I’m also a
punch-card  operator:  I’m  there  with  three  other  women,  and  I’m  getting
eighty thousand lire. A hundred and forty-eight plus eighty is two hundred and
twenty-eight, Lenù. Enzo and I are rich, and it will be even better in a few
months, because the owner realized that I’m very capable and wants me to
take a course. You see what sort of life I have, are you pleased?
72.
One night she was the one who telephoned, she said she had just had some
bad news: Dario, the student she had told me about some time earlier, the kid
from the committee who handed out leaflets in front of the Soccavo factory,
had been beaten to death, right outside of school, in Piazza del Gesù.
She seemed worried. She spoke of a black cloud that lay oppressively on the
neighborhood and the whole city, attacks and more attacks. Behind many of
these beatings, she said, were Gino’s fascists, and behind Gino was Michele
Solara, names that, in uttering, she charged with old disgust, new rage, as if
beneath  what  she  said  there  was  much  else  about  which  she  was  silent.  I
thought: How can she be so sure that they’re the ones responsible? Maybe
she’s stayed in touch with the students of Via dei Tribunali, maybe Enzo’s
computers are not the only thing in her life. I listened without interrupting
while she let the words flow in her usual gripping way. She told me in great
detail about a number of expeditions by the fascists, who started at the party
headquarters opposite the elementary school, spread up the Rettifilo, through
Piazza Municipio, up the Vomero, and attacked comrades with iron bars and
knives. Even Pasquale had been beaten a couple of times, his front teeth had
been broken. And Enzo, one night, had fought with Gino himself right in front
of their house.
Then she stopped, she changed her tone. Do you remember, she asked, the
atmosphere of the neighborhood when we were little? It’s worse, or rather no,
it’s the same. And she mentioned her father-in-law, Don Achille Carracci, the
loan shark, the Fascist, and Peluso, the carpenter, the Communist, and the war
taking place right before our eyes. We slipped slowly back into those times, I
remembered  one  detail,  she  another.  Until  Lila  accentuated  the  visionary
quality of her phrases and began to tell the story of the murder of Don Achille
the  way  she  had  as  a  girl,  with  many  fragments  of  reality  and  many  of
imagination.  The  knife  to  the  neck,  the  spurting  blood  that  had  stained  a
copper pot. She ruled out, as she had at the time, that it was the carpenter who
killed him. She said, with adult conviction: justice then, and today, for that
matter, settled for the most obvious trail, the one that led to the Communist.
Then she exclaimed: Who says it was really Carmen and Pasquale’s father? And
who says it was a man and not a woman? As in one of our childhood games,
when it seemed to us that we were in all ways complementary, I followed her
step by step, adding my voice excitedly to hers, and I had the impression that
together—the girls of the past and the adults of the present—we were arriving
at a truth that for two decades had been unspeakable. Think about it, she said,
who really gained from that murder, who ended up with the money-lending market
that Don Achille controlled? Yes, who? We found the answer in unison: the person
who  had  gotten  something  out  of  it  was  the  woman  with  the  red  book,
Manuela Solara, the mother of Marcello and Michele. She killed Don Achille, we
said excitedly, and then, turning melancholy, said softly, first I, then she: but
what are we talking about, that’s enough, we’re still children, we’ll never grow
up.
73.
Finally the moment seemed auspicious, it was a long time since we’d had our
old harmony. Only this time the harmony really was confined to a tangle of
vibrating breaths along the telephone wires. We hadn’t seen each other for a
long time. She didn’t know what I looked like after two pregnancies, I didn’t
know if she was still pale and very thin, or had changed. For several years I had
been speaking to a mental image that the voice was slowly reviving. Maybe for
that reason, the murder of Don Achille suddenly seemed like an invention, the
core of a possible story. And once I got off the telephone I tried to put order
into our conversation, reconstructing the passages on the basis of which Lila,
fusing past and present, had led me from the murder of poor Dario to that of
the loan shark, up to Manuela Solara. I had trouble sleeping, I pondered for a
long time. I felt with increasing lucidity that that material might be a shore
from  which  to  lean  out  and  grasp  a  story.  In  the  following  days  I  mixed
Florence  with  Naples,  the  tumults  of  the  present  with  distant  voices,  the
comfort of now and the struggle I had had to pull myself out of my origins, the
anxiety of losing everything and the fascination of regression. As I thought
about it I became convinced that I could make a book out of it. With great
effort, with constant, painful second thoughts, I filled a graph-paper notebook,
constructing a web of violence that welded together the past twenty years.
Sometimes Lila telephoned, she asked: “Why don’t you call anymore, aren’t
you well?”
“I’m very well, I’m writing.”
“And when you write I no longer exist?”
“You exist but I’m distracted.”
“If I’m ill, if I need you?”
“Call.”
“And if I don’t telephone you stay inside your novel?”
“Yes.”
“I envy you, lucky you.”
I worked with growing anxiety that I wouldn’t be able to get to the end of
the story before the baby was born, I was afraid I might die while I was giving
birth,  leaving  the  book  unfinished.  It  was  hard,  nothing  like  the  happy
unconsciousness in which I had written the first novel. Once I had sketched out
the story, I decided to give the text a more thoughtful pace. I wanted the
writing to be  lively, new, deliberately  chaotic, and  I didn’t hold  back. So I
worked on a second, detailed draft. I went back and rewrote every line even
when, thanks to a Lettera 32 that I had bought when I was expecting Dede,
thanks  to  carbon  paper,  I  had  transformed  the  notebooks  into  a  solid
typescript in triplicate, almost two hundred pages, with not a single typing
mistake.
It was summer, it was very hot, my belly was enormous. The pain in my
buttock had reappeared, it came and went, and my mother’s step in the hall
got on my nerves. I stared at the pages, I discovered that I was afraid of them.
For days I couldn’t make up my mind, I worried about giving it to Pietro to
read. Maybe, I thought, I should send it directly to Adele, this isn’t the type of
story for him. And besides, with the persistence that distinguished him, he
continued to make life difficult for himself at the university, coming home in a
state of agitation, making abstract speeches about the value of law—in other
words, he wasn’t in the right state of mind to read a novel about workers,
bosses, struggles, blood, camorrists, loan sharks. What’s more, my novel. He
keeps me separate from the confusion inside him, he’s never been interested in
what I was and what I’ve become, what’s the point of giving him the book?
He’ll just discuss this or that choice of word, and the punctuation, and if I insist
on an opinion he’ll say something vague. I sent Adele a copy of the manuscript,
then I called her.
“I’ve finished.”
“I’m so pleased. Will you let me read it?”
“I sent it to you this morning.”
“Good, I can’t wait to read it.”
74.
I settled myself to wait, a wait that became much more anxious than that for
the child who was kicking in my belly. I counted five days, one after another,
no word from Adele. On the sixth day, at dinner, while Dede was making an
effort to eat by herself in order not to displease me, and her grandmother was
desperate to help her but didn’t, Pietro asked me: “Did you finish your book?”
“Yes.”
“And why did you give it to my mother to read and not me?”
“You’re busy, I didn’t want to bother you. But if you want to read it, there’s a
copy on my desk.”
He didn’t answer. I waited, I asked: “Adele told you I sent it to her?”
“Who else would it have been?”
“Did she finish it?”
“Yes.”
“What does she think?”
“She’ll tell you, it’s between you two.”
He was offended. After dinner I moved the manuscript from my desk to his, I
put Dede to bed, I watched television without seeing or hearing anything, and
finally I went to bed. I couldn’t close my eyes: Why had Adele talked to Pietro
about the book but hadn’t yet called me? The next day, July 30, 1973, I went to
see if my husband had started reading: the typescript was under the books he
had been working on for most of the night, it was clear that he hadn’t even
looked through it. I became nervous, I shouted at Clelia to take care of Dede,
not to sit around and let my mother to do everything. I was very harsh with
her, and my mother evidently took it as a sign of affection. She touched my
belly as if to calm me, she asked: “If it’s another girl what will you call her?”
I had other things on my mind, my leg hurt, I answered without thinking:
“Elsa.”
She darkened, I realized too late that she was expecting me to say: We gave
Dede the name of Pietro’s mother, and if it’s another girl this time we’ll give
her  your  name.  I  tried  to  justify  it,  but  reluctantly.  I  said:  Ma,  try  to
understand, your name is Immacolata, I can’t give my daughter a name like
that, I don’t like it. She grumbled: Why, is Elsa nicer? I replied: Elsa is like Elisa,
if  I  give  her  the  name  of  my  sister  you  should  be  pleased.  She  didn’t  say
another word. Oh, how tired I was of everything. The heat was getting worse, I
was dripping with sweat, I couldn’t stand my heavy belly, I couldn’t stand my
limping, I couldn’t stand anything, not a thing.
Finally,  a  little  before  lunchtime,  Adele  telephoned.  Her  voice  lacked  its
usual ironic inflection. She spoke slowly and seriously, I felt that every word
was  a  struggle:  she  said,  with  a  lot  of  euphemistic  phrases  and  many  fine
distinctions, that the book wasn’t good. But when I tried to defend it, she
stopped looking for formulations that wouldn’t hurt me and became explicit.
The protagonist was unlikable. The characters were caricatures. Situations and
dialogues  were  mannered.  The  writing  tried  to  be  modern  and  was  only
confused.  All  that  hatred  was  unpleasant.  The  ending  was  crude,  like  a
spaghetti Western, it was an insult to my intelligence, my education, my talent.
I  resigned  myself  to  silence,  I  listened  to  her  criticisms  to  the  end.  She
concluded by saying: The earlier novel was vivid, innovative, this, however, is
old in its contents and so pretentiously written that the words seem empty. I
said quietly: Maybe at the publisher they’ll be kinder. She stiffened and replied:
If  you  want  to  send  it,  go  ahead,  but  I  would  assume  they’ll  judge  it
unpublishable. I didn’t know what to say, I said: All right, I’ll think about it,
goodbye. She kept me on the line, however, and, rapidly changing her tone,
began  to  speak  affectionately  of  Dede,  of  my  mother,  my  pregnancy,  of
Mariarosa, who enraged her. Then she asked: “Why didn’t you give the novel to
Pietro?”
“I don’t know.”
“He could have advised you.”
“I doubt it.”
“You don’t respect him?”
“No.”
Afterward,  shut  in  my  study,  I  despaired.  It  had  been  humiliating,
intolerable. I could hardly eat, I fell asleep with the window closed despite the
heat. At four in the afternoon I had my first labor pains. I said nothing to my
mother, I took the bag I had prepared, I got in the car, and drove to the clinic,
hoping to die on the way, I and my second child. Instead everything went
smoothly. The pain was excruciating, but in a few hours I had another girl.
Pietro insisted the next morning that our second daughter should be given the
name of my mother, it seemed to him a necessary tribute. I replied bitterly that
I was tired of following tradition, I repeated that she was to be called Elsa.
When I came home from the clinic, the first thing I did was call Lila. I didn’t tell
her I had just given birth, I asked if I could send her the novel.
I heard her breathing lightly for a few seconds, then she said: “I’ll read it
when it comes out.”
“I need your opinion right away.”
“I haven’t opened a book for a long time, Lenù, I don’t know how to read
anymore, I’m not capable.”
“I’m asking you as a favor.”
“The other you just published, period; why not this one?”
“Because the other one didn’t even seem like a book to me.”
“I can only tell you if I like it.”
“All right, that’s enough.”
75.
While I was waiting for Lila to read, we learned that there was a cholera
outbreak in Naples. My mother became excessively agitated, then distracted,
finally she broke a soup tureen I was fond of, and announced that she had to go
home. I imagined that if the cholera figured heavily in that decision, my refusal
to give her name to my new daughter wasn’t secondary. I tried to make her
stay but she abandoned me anyway, when I still hadn’t recovered from the
birth and my leg was hurting. She could no longer bear to sacrifice months and
months of her life to me, a child of hers without respect and without gratitude,
she would rather go and die of the cholera bacterium with her husband and
her good children. Yet even in the doorway she maintained the impassiveness
that I had imposed on her: she didn’t complain, she didn’t grumble, she didn’t
reproach me for anything. She was happy for Pietro to take her to the station
in the car. She felt that her son-in-law loved her and probably—I thought—she
had  controlled  herself  not  to  please  me  so  that  she  wouldn’t  make  a  bad
impression on him. She became emotional only when she had to part from
Dede. On the landing she asked the child in her effortful Italian: Are you sorry
that grandma is leaving? Dede, who felt that departure as a betrayal, answered
grimly: No.
I was angry with myself, more than with her. Then I was seized by a self-
destructive  frenzy  and  a  few  hours  later  I  fired  Clelia.  Pietro  was  amazed,
alarmed. I said to him rancorously that I was tired of fighting with Dede’s
Maremman accent, with my mother’s Neapolitan one. I wanted to go back to
being mistress of my house and my children. In reality I felt guilty and had a
great need to punish myself. With desperate pleasure I surrendered to the idea
of being overwhelmed by the two children, by my domestic duties, by my
painful leg.
I had no doubt that Elsa would compel me to a year no less terrible than the
one  I’d  had  with  Dede.  But  maybe  because  I  was  more  experienced  with
newborns, maybe because I was resigned to being a bad mother and wasn’t
anxious about perfection, the infant attached herself to my breast with no
trouble and devoted herself to feeding and sleeping. As a result I, too, slept a
lot, those first days at home, and Pietro surprisingly cleaned the house, did the
shopping and cooking, bathed Elsa, played with Dede, who was as if dazed by
the arrival of a sister and the departure of her grandmother. The pain in my
leg suddenly disappeared. And I was in a generally peaceful state when, one
late afternoon, as I was napping, my husband came to wake me: Your friend
from Naples is on the phone, he said. I hurried to answer.
Lila had talked to Pietro for a long time, she said she couldn’t wait to meet
him in person. I listened reluctantly—Pietro was always amiable with people
who didn’t belong to the world of his parents—and since she dragged it out in a
tone that seemed to me nervously cheerful, I was ready to shout at her: I’ve
given you the chance to hurt me as much as possible, hurry up, speak, you’ve
had the book for thirteen days, let me know what you think. But I confined
myself to breaking in abruptly: “Did you read it or not?”
She became serious.
“I read it.”
“And so?”
“It’s good.”
“Good how? Did it interest you, amuse you, bore you?”
“It interested me.”
“How much? A little? A lot?”
“A lot.”
“And why?”
“Because of the story: it makes you want to read.”
“And then?”
“Then what?”
I stiffened, and said: “Lila, I absolutely have to know how this thing that I
wrote is and I have no one else who can tell me, only you.”
“I’m doing that.”
“No, it’s not true, you’re cheating me: you’ve never talked about anything in
such a superficial way.”
There was a long silence. I imagined her sitting, legs crossed, next to an ugly
little  table  on  which  the  telephone  stood.  Maybe  she  and  Enzo  had  just
returned from work, maybe Gennaro was playing nearby. She said: “I told you I
don’t know how to read anymore.”
“That’s not the point: it’s that I need you and you don’t give a damn.”
Another silence. Then she muttered something I didn’t understand, maybe
an insult. She said harshly, resentful: I do one job, you do another, what do you
expect from me, you’re the one who had an education, you’re the one who
knows what books should be like. Then her voice broke, she almost cried: You
mustn’t  write  those  things,  Lenù,  you  aren’t  that,  none  of  what  I  read
resembles you, it’s an ugly, ugly book, and the one before it was, too.
Like that. Rapid and yet strangled phrases, as if her breath, light, a whisper,
had suddenly become solid and couldn’t move in and out of her throat. I felt
sick to my stomach, a sharp pain above my belly, which grew sharper, but not
because  of  what  she  said  but  rather  because  of  how  she  said  it.  Was  she
sobbing?  I  exclaimed  anxiously:  Lila,  what’s  wrong,  calm  down,  come  on,
breathe. She didn’t calm down. They were really sobs, I heard them in my ear,
burdened with such suffering that I couldn’t feel the wound of that ugly, Lenù,
ugly, ugly, nor was I offended that she reduced my first book, too—the book
that had sold so well, the book of my success, but of which she had never told
me what she thought—to a failure. What hurt me was her weeping. I wasn’t
prepared, I hadn’t expected it. I would have preferred the mean Lila, I would
have preferred her treacherous tone. But no, she was sobbing, and she couldn’t
control herself.
I felt bewildered. All right, I thought, I’ve written two bad books, but what
does it matter, this unhappiness is much more serious. And I said softly: Lila,
why are you crying, I should be crying, stop it. But she shrieked: Why did you
make me read it, why did you force me to tell you what I think, I should have
kept it to myself. And I: No, I’m glad you told me, I swear. I wanted her to quiet
down but she couldn’t, she poured out on me a confusion of words: Don’t make
me read anything else, I’m not fit for it, I expect the best from you, I’m too
certain that you can do better, I want you to do better, it’s what I want most,
because who am I if you aren’t great, who am I? I whispered: Don’t worry,
always tell me what you think, that’s the only way you can help me, you’ve
helped me since we were children, without you I’m not capable of anything.
And finally she smothered her sobs, she said, sniffling: Why did I start crying,
I’m an idiot. She laughed: I didn’t want to upset you, I had prepared a positive
speech, imagine, I wrote it, I wanted to make a good impression. I urged her to
send it, I said, it could be that you know better than I do what I should write.
And at that point we forgot the book, I told her that Elsa was born, we talked
about  Florence,  Naples,  the  cholera.  What  cholera,  she  said  sarcastically,
there’s no cholera, there’s only the usual mess and the fear of dying in shit,
more fear than facts, we eat a bag of lemons and no one shits anymore.
Now she talked continuously, without a break, almost cheerful, a weight had
been  lifted.  As  a  result  I  began  again  to  feel  the  bind  I  was  in—two  small
daughters, a husband generally absent, the disaster of the writing—and yet I
didn’t feel anxious; rather, I felt light, and I brought the conversation back to
my failure. I had in mind phrases like: the thread is broken, that fluency of
yours that had a positive effect on me is gone, now I’m truly alone. But I didn’t
say it. I confessed instead in a self-satirizing tone that behind the labor of that
book was the desire to settle accounts with the neighborhood, that it seemed
to me to represent the great changes that surrounded me, that what had in
some way suggested it, encouraging me, was the story of Don Achille and the
mother of the Solaras. She burst out laughing. She said that the disgusting face
of things alone was not enough for writing a novel: without imagination it
would seem not a true face but a mask.
76.
I don’t really know what happened to me afterward. Even now, as I sort out
that phone call, it’s hard to relate the effects of Lila’s sobs. If I look closely, I
have the impression of seeing mainly a sort of incongruous gratification, as if
that  crying  spell,  in  confirming  her  affection  and  the  faith  she  had  in  my
abilities, had ultimately cancelled out the negative judgment of both books.
Only much later did it occur to me that the sobs had allowed her to destroy my
work without appeal, to escape my resentment, to impose on me a purpose so
high—don’t disappoint her—that it paralyzed every other attempt to write. But I
repeat: however much I try to decipher that phone call, I can’t say that it was
at the origin of this or that, that it was an exalted moment of our friendship or
one of the most wretched. Certainly Lila reinforced her role as a mirror of my
inabilities. Certainly I was more willing to accept failure, as if Lila’s opinion
were  much  more  authoritative—but  also  more  persuasive  and  more
affectionate—than that of my mother-in-law.
In fact a few days later I called Adele and said to her: Thank you for being so
frank, I realized that you’re right, and it strikes me now that my first book, too,
had a lot of flaws. Maybe I ought to think about it, maybe I’m not a good writer,
or  I  simply  need  more  time.  My  mother-in-law  hastily  drowned  me  in
compliments, praised my capacity for self-criticism, reminded me that I had an
audience and that that audience was waiting. I said yes, of course. And right
afterward I put the last copy of the novel in a drawer, I also put away the
notebooks full of notes, I let myself be absorbed by daily life. The irritation at
that useless labor extended to my first book, too, perhaps even to the literary
purposes of writing. If an image or an evocative phrase came to mind, I felt a
sense of uneasiness, and moved on to something else.
I devoted myself to the house, to the children, to Pietro. Not once did I think
of having Clelia back or of replacing her with someone else. Again I took on
everything, and certainly I did it to put myself in a stupor. But it happened
without effort, without bitterness, as if I had suddenly discovered that this was
the right way of spending one’s life, and a part of me whispered: Enough of
those silly notions in your head. I organized the household tasks rigidly, and I
took  care  of  Elsa  and  Dede  with  an  unexpected  pleasure,  as  if  besides  the
weight of the womb, besides the weight of the manuscript, I had rid myself of
another, more hidden weight, which I myself was unable to name. Elsa proved
to be a placid creature—she took long happy baths, she nursed, she slept, she
smiled even in her sleep—but I had to be very attentive to Dede, who hated her
sister. She woke in the morning with a wild expression, recounting how she
had  saved  the  baby  from  fire,  from  a  flood,  from  a  wolf,  but  mostly  she
pretended to be a newborn herself, and asked to suck on my nipples, imitated
infant wails, refused to act as what she now was, a child of almost four with
highly developed language, perfectly independent in her primary functions. I
was careful to give her a lot of affection, to praise her intelligence and her
ability, to persuade her that I needed her help with everything, the shopping,
the cooking, keeping her sister out of trouble.
Meanwhile, since I was terrified by the possibility of getting pregnant again,
I began to take the Pill. I gained weight, I felt as if I’d swelled up, yet I didn’t
dare stop: a new pregnancy frightened me more than any other thing. And
then my body didn’t matter to me the way it used to. The two children seemed
to have confirmed that I was no longer young, that the signs of my labors—
washing them, dressing them, the stroller, the shopping, cooking, one in my
arms and one by the hand, both in my arms, wiping the nose of one, cleaning
the mouth of the other—testified to my maturity as a woman, that to become
like the mammas of the neighborhood wasn’t a threat but the order of things.
It’s fine this way, I told myself.
Pietro, who had given in on the Pill after resisting for a long time, examined
me, preoccupied. You’re getting fat. What are those spots on your skin? He was
afraid that the children, and he, and I were getting sick, but he hated doctors. I
tried to reassure him. He had gotten very thin lately: he always had circles
under his eyes and white strands had appeared in his hair; he complained of
pain in his knee, in his right side, in his shoulder, and yet he wouldn’t have an
examination. I forced him to go, I went with him, along with the children, and,
apart from the need for some sleeping pills, he turned out to be very healthy.
That made him euphoric for a few hours, and all his symptoms vanished. But in
a short time, in spite of the sedatives, he felt ill again. Once Dede wouldn’t let
him watch the news—it was right after the coup in Chile—and he spanked her
much too hard. And as soon as I began to take the Pill he developed a desire to
make love even more frequently than before, but only in the morning or the
afternoon,  because—he  said—it  was  the  evening  orgasm  that  made  him
sleepless; then he was compelled to study for a good part of the night, which
made him feel chronically tired and consequently ill.
Nonsensical talk: working at night had always been for him a habit and a
necessity. Yet I said: Let’s not do it at night anymore, anything was fine with
me. Of course, sometimes I was exasperated. It was hard to get help from him
even in small things: the shopping when he was free, washing the dishes after
dinner. One evening I lost my temper: I didn’t say anything terrible, I just
raised my voice. And I made an important discovery: if I merely shouted, his
stubbornness  disappeared  and  he  obeyed  me.  It  was  possible,  by  speaking
harshly, to make even his unpredictable pains go away, even his neurotic wish
to make love constantly. But I didn’t like doing it. When I behaved like that, I
was sorry, it seemed to cause a painful tremor in his brain. Besides, the results
weren’t lasting. He gave in, he adjusted, he took on tasks with a certain gravity,
but then he really was tired, he forgot agreements, he went back to thinking
only about himself. In the end I let it go, I tried to make him laugh, I kissed
him. What did I gain from a few washed dishes, poorly washed at that? Better
to leave him tranquil, I was glad when I could avoid tension.
In order not to upset him I also learned not to say what I thought. He didn’t
seem  to  care,  anyway.  If  he  talked,  I  don’t  know,  about  the  government
measure in response to the oil crisis, if he praised the rapprochement of the
Communist Party to the Christian Democrats, he preferred me to be only an
approving listener. And when I appeared to disagree he assumed an absent-
minded expression, or said in a tone that he obviously used with his students:
you were badly brought up, you don’t know the value of democracy, of the
state, of the law, of mediation between established interests, balance between
nations—you like apocalypse. I was his wife, an educated wife, and he expected
me  to  pay  close  attention  when  he  spoke  to  me  about  politics,  about  his
studies, about the new book he was working on, filled with anxiety, wearing
himself out, but the attention had to be affectionate; he didn’t want opinions,
especially  if  they  caused  doubts.  It  was  as  if  he  were  thinking  out  loud,
explaining to himself. And yet his mother was a completely different type of
woman. And so was his sister. Evidently he didn’t want me to be like them.
During that period of weakness, I understood from certain vague remarks that
he  wasn’t  happy  about  not  only  the  success  of  my  first  book  but  its  very
publication. As for the second, he never asked me what had happened to the
manuscript and what future projects I had. The fact that I no longer mentioned
writing seemed to be a relief to him.
That Pietro every day revealed himself to be worse than I had expected did
not, however, drive me again toward others. At times I ran into Mario, the
engineer, but I quickly discovered that the desire to seduce and be seduced had
disappeared and in fact that former agitation seemed to me a rather ridiculous
phase; luckily it had passed. The craving to get out of the house, participate in
the public life of the city also diminished. If I decided to go to a debate or a
demonstration, I always took the children, and I was proud of the bags I toted,
stuffed with everything they might need, of the cautious disapproval of those
who said: They’re so little, it might be dangerous.
But I went out every day, in whatever weather, so that my daughters could
have air and sun. I never went without taking a book. Out of a habit that I had
never lost, I continued to read wherever I was, even if the ambition of making a
world for myself had vanished. I generally took a short walk and then sat on a
bench  not  far  from  home.  I  paged  through  complicated  essays,  I  read  the
newspaper, I yelled: Dede, don’t go far, stay close to Mamma. I was that, I had
to accept it. Lila, whatever turn her life might take, was different.
77.
It happened that around that time Mariarosa came to Florence to present
the book of a university colleague of hers on the Madonna del Parto. Pietro
swore he wouldn’t miss it, but at the last minute he made an excuse and hid
somewhere. My sister-in-law arrived by car, alone this time, a bit tired but
affectionate as always and loaded with presents for Dede and Elsa. She never
mentioned my aborted novel, even though Adele had surely told her about it.
She  talked  volubly  about  trips  she’d  taken,  about  books,  with  her  usual
enthusiasm. She pursued energetically the many novelties of the planet. She
would assert one thing, get tired of it, go on to another that a little earlier, out
of  distraction,  blindness,  she  had  rejected.  When  she  spoke  about  her
colleague’s book, she immediately gained the admiration of the art historians
in the audience. And the evening would have run smoothly along the usual
academic tracks if at a certain point, with an abrupt swerve, she hadn’t uttered
remarks, occasionally vulgar, of this type: children shouldn’t be given to any
father, least of all God the Father, children should be given to themselves; the
moment  has  arrived  to  study  as  women  and  not  as  men;  behind  every
discipline is the penis and when the penis feels impotent it resorts to the iron
bar, the police, the prisons, the army, the concentration camps; and if you
don’t submit, if, rather, you continue to turn everything upside down, then
comes  slaughter.  Shouts  of  discontent,  of  agreement:  at  the  end  she  was
surrounded by a dense crowd of women. She called me over with welcoming
gestures, proudly showed off Dede and Elsa to her Florentine friends, said nice
things about me. Some remembered my book, but I avoided it, as if I hadn’t
written  it.  The  evening  was  nice,  and  brought  an  invitation,  from  a  small,
varied group of girls and adult women, to go to the house of one of them, once
a week, to talk—they said—about us.
Mariarosa’s provocative remarks and the invitation of her friends led me to
fish out from under a pile of books those pamphlets Adele had given me long
before. I carried them around in my purse, I read them outside, under the gray
sky of late winter. First, intrigued by the title, I read an essay entitled We Spit on
Hegel. I read it while Elsa slept in her carriage and Dede, in coat, scarf, and
woolen hat, talked to her doll in a low voice. Every sentence struck me, every
word, and above all the bold freedom of thought. I forcefully underlined many
of the sentences, I made exclamation points, vertical strokes. Spit on Hegel.
Spit on the culture of men, spit on Marx, on Engels, on Lenin. And on historical
materialism. And on Freud. And on psychoanalysis and penis envy. And on
marriage, on family. And on Nazism, on Stalinism, on terrorism. And on war.
And on the class struggle. And on the dictatorship of the proletariat. And on
socialism. And on Communism. And on the trap of equality. And on all the
manifestations of patriarchal culture. And on all its institutional forms. Resist
the  waste  of  female  intelligence.  Deculturate.  Disacculturate,  starting  with
maternity, don’t give children to anyone. Get rid of the master-slave dialectic.
Rip inferiority from our brains. Restore women to themselves. Don’t create
antitheses. Move on another plane in the name of one’s own difference. The
university doesn’t free women but completes their repression. Against wisdom.
While men devote themselves to undertakings in space, life for women on this
planet has yet to begin. Woman is the other face of the earth. Woman is the
Unpredictable Subject. Free oneself from subjection here, now, in this present.
The  author  of  those  pages  was  called  Carla  Lonzi.  How  is  it  possible,  I
wondered, that a woman knows how to think like that. I worked so hard on
books, but I endured them, I never actually used them, I never turned them
against themselves. This is thinking. This is thinking against. I—after so much
exertion—don’t know how to think. Nor does Mariarosa: she’s read pages and
pages, and she rearranges them with flair, putting on a show. That’s it. Lila, on
the other hand, knows. It’s her nature. If she had studied, she would know how
to think like this.
That idea became insistent. Everything I read in that period ultimately drew
Lila in, one way or another. I had come upon a female model of thinking that,
given the obvious differences, provoked in me the same admiration, the same
sense of inferiority that I felt toward her. Not only that: I read thinking of her,
of fragments of her life, of the sentences she would agree with, of those she
would have rejected. Afterward, impelled by that reading, I often joined the
group of Mariarosa’s friends, but it wasn’t easy: Dede asked me continuously
when we were leaving, Elsa would suddenly let out cries of joy. But it wasn’t
just  my  daughters  who  were  the  problem.  It  was  that  there  I  found  only
women  who,  resembling  me,  couldn’t  help  me.  I  was  bored  when  the
discussion became a sort of inelegant summary of what I already knew. And it
seemed to me I knew well enough what it meant to be born female, I wasn’t
interested  in  the  work  of  consciousness-raising.  And  I  had  no  intention  of
speaking in public about my relationship with Pietro, or with men in general,
to provide testimony about what men are, of every class and of every age. And
no one knew better than I did what it meant to make your own head masculine
so that it would be accepted by the culture of men; I had done it, I was doing it.
Furthermore I remained completely outside the tensions, the explosions of
jealousy,  the  authoritarian  tones,  weak,  submissive  voices,  intellectual
hierarchies, struggles for primacy in the group that ended in desperate tears.
But there was one new fact, which naturally led me to Lila. I was fascinated by
the way people talked, confronted each other—explicit to the point of being
disagreeable. I didn’t like the amenability that yielded to gossip: I had known
enough of that since childhood. What seduced me instead was an urge for
authenticity that I had never felt and that perhaps was not in my nature. I
never said a single word, in that circle, that was equal to that urgency. But I felt
that I should do something like that with Lila, examine our connection with
the same inflexibility, that we should tell each other fully what we had been
silent about, starting perhaps from the unaccustomed lament for my mistaken
book.
That need was so strong that I imagined going to Naples with the children
for a while, or asking her to come to me with Gennaro, or to write to each
other. I talked about it with her once on the phone but it was a fiasco. I told her
about  the  books  by  women  I  was  reading,  about  the  group  I  went  to.  She
listened but then she laughed at titles like The Clitoral Woman and the Vaginal
Woman, and did her best to be vulgar: What the fuck are you talking about,
Lenù, pleasure, pussy, we’ve got plenty of problems here already, you’re crazy.
She wanted to prove that she didn’t have the tools to put into words the things
that interested me. And in the end she was scornful, she said: Work, do the nice
things you have to do, don’t waste time. She got angry. Evidently it’s not the
right moment, I thought, I’ll try again later on. But I never found the time or
the courage to try again. I concluded that first of all I had to understand better
what I was. Investigate my nature as a woman. I had been excessive, I had
striven to give myself male capacities. I thought I had to know everything, be
concerned with everything. What did I care about politics, about struggles. I
wanted to make a good impression on men, be at their level. At the level of
what,  of  their  reason,  most  unreasonable.  Such  persistence  in  memorizing
fashionable jargon, wasted effort. I had been conditioned by my education,
which had shaped my mind, my voice. To what secret pacts with myself had I
consented, just to excel. And now, after the hard work of learning, what must I
unlearn. Also, I had been forced by the powerful presence of Lila to imagine
myself  as  I  was  not.  I  was  added  to  her,  and  I  felt  mutilated  as  soon  as  I
removed myself. Not an idea, without Lila. Not a thought I trusted, without the
support of her thoughts. Not an image. I had to accept myself outside of her.
The gist was that. Accept that I was an average person. What should I do. Try
again to write. Maybe I didn’t have the passion, I merely limited myself to
carrying out a task. So don’t write anymore. Find some job. Or act the lady, as
my mother said. Shut myself up in the family. Or turn everything upside down.
House. Children. Husband.
78.
I consolidated my relations with Mariarosa. I called her frequently, but when
Pietro noticed he began to speak more and more contemptuously of his sister.
She was frivolous, she was empty, she was dangerous to herself and others, she
had been the cruel tormenter of his childhood and adolescence, she was the
great worry of her parents. One evening he came out of his study disheveled,
his face tired, while I was talking to my sister-in-law on the phone. He walked
around the kitchen, ate something, joked with Dede, eavesdropping on our
conversation. Then all of a sudden he shouted: Doesn’t that idiot know it’s time
for dinner? I apologized to Mariarosa and hung up. It’s all ready, I said, we can
eat right away, there’s no need to shout. He complained that spending money
on phone calls to listen to his sister’s nonsense seemed stupid to him. I didn’t
answer,  I  set  the  table.  He  realized  I  was  angry,  and  said,  in  a  tone  of
apprehension: I’m mad at Mariarosa, not you. But after that night he began to
look through the books I was reading, to make sarcastic comments on the
sentences I had underlined. He said, Don’t be taken in, it’s nonsense. And he
tried to demonstrate the weak logic of feminist manifestos and pamphlets.
On this very subject we ended up arguing one evening and maybe I overdid
it, going so far as to say to him: You think you’re so great but everything you
are you owe to your father and mother, just like Mariarosa. His reaction was
completely unexpected: he slapped me, and in Dede’s presence.
I took it well, better than he did: I had had many blows in the course of my
life, Pietro had never given any and almost certainly had never received any. I
saw in his face the revulsion for what he had done; he stared at his daughter
for an instant, and left the house. My anger cooled. I didn’t go to bed, I waited
for him, and when he didn’t return I became anxious, I didn’t know what to do.
Did he have some nervous illness, from too little sleep? Or was that his true
nature, buried under thousands of books and a proper upbringing? I realized
yet again that I knew little about him, that I wasn’t able to predict his moves:
he might have jumped into the Arno, be lying drunk somewhere, even left for
Genoa to find comfort and complain in his mother’s arms. Oh enough, I was
frightened. I realized that I was leaving what I was reading, and what I knew,
on the edges of my personal life. I had two daughters, I didn’t want to draw
conclusions too hastily.
Pietro came home at around five in the morning and the relief of seeing him
safe and sound was so great that I hugged him, I kissed him. He mumbled: You
don’t love me, you’ve never loved me. And he added: Anyway, I don’t deserve
you.
79.
The  fact  was  that  Pietro  couldn’t  accept  the  disorder  that  was  by  now
spreading into every aspect of existence. He would have liked a life ruled by
unquestioned  habits:  studying,  teaching,  playing  with  the  children,  making
love,  contributing  every  day,  in  his  small  way,  to  resolving  by  democratic
means the vast confusion of Italian affairs. Instead he was exhausted by the
conflicts at the university, his colleagues disparaged his work, and although he
was gaining a reputation abroad, he felt constantly vilified and threatened, he
had the impression that because of my restlessness (but what restlessness, I
was an opaque woman) our very family was exposed to constant risks. One
afternoon Elsa was playing on her own, I was making Dede practice reading, he
was shut in his study, the house was still. Pietro, I thought anxiously, is looking
for a fortress where he works on his book, I take care of the household, and the
children grow up serenely. Then the doorbell rang, I went to open the door,
and to my surprise Pasquale and Nadia entered.
They carried large military knapsacks; he wore a cap over a thick mass of
curly hair that fell into an equally thick and curly beard, while she looked thin
and tired, her eyes enormous, like a frightened child who is pretending not to
be afraid. They had asked for the address from Carmen, who in turn had asked
my mother. They were both affectionate, and I was, too, as if there had never
been tensions or disagreements between us. They took over the house, leaving
their things everywhere. Pasquale talked a lot, in a loud voice, almost always in
dialect. At first they seemed a pleasant break in my flat daily existence. But I
soon realized that Pietro didn’t like them. It bothered him that they hadn’t
telephoned to announce themselves, that they brazenly made themselves at
home. Nadia took off her shoes and stretched out on the sofa. Pasquale kept his
cap  on,  handled  objects,  leafed  through  books,  took  a  beer  from  the
refrigerator for himself and one for Nadia without asking permission, drank
from the bottle and burped in a way that made Dede laugh. They said they had
decided to take a trip, they said just that, a trip, without specifying. When had
they  left  Naples?  They  were  evasive.  When  would  they  return?  They  were
equally evasive. Work? I asked Pasquale. He laughed: Enough, I’ve worked too
much, now I’m resting. And he showed Pietro his hands, he demanded that he
show him his, he rubbed their palms together saying: You feel the difference?
Then he grabbed Lotta Continua and brushed his right hand over the first page,
proud of the sound of the paper scraping over his rough skin, as pleased as if
he had invented a new game. Then he added, in an almost threatening tone:
Without these rasping hands, professor, not a chair would exist, or a building, a
car, nothing, not even you; if we workers stopped working everything would
stop, the sky would fall to earth and the earth would shoot up to the sky, the
plants would take over the cities, the Arno would flood your fine houses, and
only those who have always worked would know how to survive, and as for you
two, you with all your books, the dogs would tear you to pieces.
It was a speech in Pasquale’s style, fervent and sincere, and Pietro listened
without responding. As did Nadia, who, while her companion was speaking, lay
on the sofa with a serious expression, staring at the ceiling. She almost never
interrupted the two men’s talk, nor did she say anything to me. But when I
went to make coffee she followed me into the kitchen. She noticed that Elsa
was always attached to me, and she said gravely: “She really loves you.”
“She’s little.”
“You’re saying that when she grows up she won’t love you?”
“No, I hope she’ll love me when she’s grown up, too.”
“My mother used to talk about you all the time. You were only her student,
but it seemed as if you were her daughter more than me.”
“Really?”
“I hated you for that and because you had taken Nino.”
“It wasn’t for me that he left you.”
“Who cares, I don’t even remember what he looked like now.”
“As a girl I would have liked to be like you.”
“Why? You think it’s nice to be born with everything all ready-made for
you?”
“Well, you don’t have to work so hard.”
“You’re  wrong—the  truth  is  that  it  seems  like  everything’s  been  done
already and you’ve got no good reason to do anything. All you feel is the guilt
of what you are and that you don’t deserve it.”
“Better that than to feel the guilt of failure.”
“Is that what your friend Lina tells you?”
“No.”
“I prefer her to you. You’re two pieces of shit and nothing can change you,
two examples of underclass filth. But you act all friendly and Lina doesn’t.”
She left me in the kitchen, speechless. I heard her shout to Pasquale: I’m
taking a shower, and you could use one, too. They shut themselves in the
bathroom. We heard them laughing, she letting out little cries that—I saw—
worried Dede. When they came out their hair was wet, they were half-naked,
and gay. They went on joking and laughing with each other as if we weren’t
there. Pietro tried to intervene with questions like: How long have you been
together?  Nadia  answered  coldly:  We’re  not  together,  maybe  you  two  are
together. In the finicky tone he displayed in situations where people appeared
to him extremely superficial: What does that mean? You can’t understand,
Nadia responded. My husband objected: When someone can’t understand, you
try to explain. And at that point Pasquale broke in laughing: There’s nothing to
explain,  prof:  you  better  believe  you’re  dead  and  you  don’t  know  it—
everything  is  dead,  the  way  you  live  is  dead,  the  way  you  speak,  your
conviction that you’re very intelligent, and democratic, and on the left. How
can you explain a thing to someone who’s dead?
There  were  other  tense  moments.  I  said  nothing,  I  couldn’t  get  Nadia’s
insults out of my mind, the way she spoke, as if it were nothing, in my house.
Finally they left, almost without warning, as they had arrived. They picked up
their things and disappeared. Pasquale said only, in the doorway, in a voice
that was unexpectedly sorrowful: “Goodbye, Signora Airota.”
Signora Airota. Even my friend from the neighborhood was judging me in a
negative way? Did it mean that for him I was no longer Lenù, Elena, Elena
Greco? For him and for how many others? Even for me? Did I myself not almost
always use my husband’s surname, now that mine had lost that small luster it
had acquired? I tidied the house, especially the bathroom, which they had left
a mess. Pietro said: I never want those two in my house; someone who talks
like that about intellectual work is a Fascist, even if he doesn’t know it; as for
her, she’s a type I’m very familiar with, there’s not a thought in her head.
80.
As  if  to  prove  Pietro  right,  the  disorder  began  to  take  concrete  form,
touching people  who  had  been  close  to  me.  I  learned  from  Mariarosa  that
Franco had been attacked in Milan by the fascists, he was in bad shape, and had
lost  an  eye.  I  left  immediately,  with  Dede  and  little  Elsa.  I  took  the  train,
playing with the girls and feeding them, but saddened by another me—the
poor,  uneducated  girlfriend  of  the  wealthy  and  hyperpoliticized  student
Franco  Mari:  how  many  me’s  were  there  by  now?—who  had  been  lost
somewhere and was now re-emerging.
At the station I met my sister-in-law, who was pale and worried. She took us
to her house, which this time was deserted, yet even more untidy than when I
had stayed there after the meeting at the university. While Dede played and
Elsa slept, she told me more than she had on the telephone. The episode had
happened  five  days  earlier.  Franco  had  spoken  at  a  demonstration  of
Avanguardia  Operaia,  in  a  packed  theater.  Afterward  he  had  gone  off  with
Silvia, who now lived with an editor at Giorno in a beautiful apartment near the
theater: he was to sleep there and leave the next day for Piacenza. They were
almost at the door, Silvia had just taken the keys out of her purse, when a
white van pulled up and the fascists had jumped out. He had been severely
beaten, Silvia had been beaten and raped.
We drank a lot of wine, Mariarosa took out the drug: that’s what she called
it, in other situations she used the plural. This time I decided to try it, but only
because, in spite of the wine, I felt I hadn’t a single solid thing to hold on to. My
sister-in-law  became  furious,  then  stopped  talking  and  burst  into  tears.  I
couldn’t find a single word of comfort. I felt her tears, it seemed to me that they
made a sound sliding from her eyes down her cheeks. Suddenly I couldn’t see
her, I couldn’t even see the room, everything turned black. I fainted.
When I came to, I apologized, hugely embarrassed, I said it was tiredness. I
didn’t sleep much that night: my body weighed heavily because of an excess of
discipline, and the lexicon of books and journals dripped anguish as if suddenly
the signs of the alphabet could no longer be combined. I held the two little girls
close as if they were the ones who had to comfort and protect me.
The next day I left Dede and Elsa with my sister-in-law and went to the
hospital. I found Franco in a sickly-green ward that had an intense odor of
breath, urine, and medicine. He was as if shortened and distended, I can still
see him in my mind’s eye, because of the white bandages, the violet color of
part of his face and neck. He didn’t seem glad to see me, he seemed ashamed of
his condition. I talked, I told him about my children. After a few minutes he
said:  Go  away,  I  don’t  want  you  here.  When  I  insisted  on  staying,  he  was
irritated, and whispered: I’m not myself, go away. He was very ill; I learned
from a small group of his companions that he might have to have another
operation. When I came back from the hospital Mariarosa saw that I was upset.
She helped with the children, and as soon as Dede fell asleep she sent me to
bed, too. The next day, however, she wanted me to come with her to see Silvia.
I tried to avoid it, I had found it unbearable to see Franco and feel not only that
I couldn’t help him but that I made him feel more fragile. I said I preferred to
remember her as I had seen her during the meeting at the university. No,
Mariarosa insisted, she wants us to see her as she is now, it’s important to her.
We went.
A very well-groomed woman, with blond hair that fell in waves over her
shoulders, opened the door. It was Silvia’s mother, and she had Mirko with her;
he, too, was blond, a child of five or six by now, whom Dede, in her sulky yet
bossy way, immediately insisted play a game with Tes, the old doll she carried
everywhere.  Silvia  was  sleeping  but  had  left  word  that  she  wanted  to  be
awakened when we got there. We waited awhile before she appeared. She was
heavily made up, and had put on a pretty long green dress. I wasn’t struck so
much by the bruises, the cuts, the hesitant walk—Lila had seemed in even
worse  shape  when  she  returned  from  her  honeymoon—as  by  her
expressionless gaze. Her eyes were blank, and completely at odds with the
frenetic talking, broken by little laughs, with which she began to recount to me,
only to me, who still didn’t know, what the fascists had done to her. She spoke
as if she were reciting a horrendous nursery rhyme that was for now the way
in which she deposited the horror, repeating it to anyone who came to see her.
Her mother kept trying to make her stop, but each time she pushed her away
with  a  gesture  of  irritation,  raising  her  voice,  uttering  obscenities  and
predicting a time soon, very soon, of violent revenge. When I burst into tears
she  stopped  abruptly.  But  other  people  arrived,  mostly  family  friends  and
comrades. Then Silvia began again, and I quickly retreated to a corner, hugging
Elsa, kissing her lightly. I remembered details of what Stefano had done to Lila,
details that I imagined while Silvia was narrating, and it seemed to me that the
words of both stories were animal cries of terror.
At a certain point I went to look for Dede. I found her in the hall with Mirko
and her doll. They were pretending to be a mother and father with their baby,
but it wasn’t peaceful: they were pretending to have a fight. I stopped. Dede
instructed  Mirko:  You  have  to  hit  me,  understand?  The  new  living  flesh  was
replicating the old in a game, we were a chain of shadows who had always been
on  the  stage  with  the  same  burden  of  love,  hatred,  desire,  and  violence.  I
observed Dede carefully; she seemed to resemble Pietro. Mirko, on the other
hand, was just like Nino.
81.
Not long afterward, the underground war that occasionally erupted into the
newspapers  and  on  television—plans  for  coups,  police  repression,  armed
bands, firefights, woundings, killings, bombs and slaughters I was struck again
by  in  the  cities  large  and  small.  Carmen  telephoned,  she  was  extremely
worried, she hadn’t heard from Pasquale in weeks.
“Did he by any chance visit you?”
“Yes, but at least two months ago.”
“Ah. He asked for your phone number and address: he wanted to get your
advice, did he?”
“Advice about what?”
“I don’t know.”
“He didn’t ask me for advice.”
“What did he say?”
“Nothing, he was fine, he was happy.”
Carmen had asked everywhere, even Lila, even Enzo, even the people in the
collective on Via dei Tribunali. Finally she had called Nadia’s house, but the
mother had been rude and Armando had told her only that Nadia had moved
without leaving any address.
“They must have gone to live together.”
“Pasquale and that girl? Without leaving an address or phone number?”
We talked about it for a long time. I said maybe Nadia had broken with her
family  because  of  Pasquale,  who  knows,  maybe  they  had  gone  to  live  in
Germany, in England, in France. But Carmen wasn’t persuaded. Pasquale is a
loving brother, she said, he would never disappear like that. She had instead a
terrible  presentiment:  there  were  now  daily  clashes  in  the  neighborhood,
anyone  who  was  a  comrade  had  to  watch  his  back,  the  fascists  had  even
threatened her and her husband. And they had accused Pasquale of setting fire
to the fascist headquarters and to the Solaras’ supermarket. I hadn’t known
either  of  those  things,  I  was  astonished:  This  had  happened  in  the
neighborhood, and the fascists blamed Pasquale? Yes, he was at the top of the
list, he was considered someone to get out of the way. Maybe, Carmen said,
Gino had him killed.
“You went to the police?”
“Yes.”
“What did they say?”
“They nearly arrested me, they’re more fascist than the fascists.”
I called Professor Galiani. She said to me sarcastically: What happened, I
don’t see you in the bookshops anymore or even in the newspapers, have you
already retired? I said that I had two children, that for now I was taking care of
them, and then I asked her about Nadia. She became unfriendly. Nadia is a
grownup, she’s gone to live on her own. Where, I asked. Her business, she
answered, and, without saying goodbye, just as I was asking if she would give
me her son’s telephone number, she hung up.
I spent a long time finding a number for Armando, and had an even harder
time finding him at home. When he finally answered, he seemed happy to hear
from me, and even too eager for confidences. He worked a lot in the hospital,
his marriage was over, his wife had left, taking the child, he was alone and
eccentric. He stumbled when he talked about his sister. He said quietly: I don’t
have any contact with her. Political differences, differences about everything.
Ever since she’s been with Pasquale you can’t talk to her. I asked: Did they go to
live together? He broke off: Let’s say that. And as if the subject seemed too
frivolous, he avoided it, moved on, making harsh comments on the political
situation, talking about the slaughter in Brescia, the bosses who bankrolled the
parties and, as soon as things looked bad, the fascists.
I called Carmen again to reassure her. I told her that Nadia had broken with
her family to be with Pasquale and that Pasquale followed her like a puppy.
“You think?” Carmen asked.
“I’m sure, love is like that.”
She was skeptical. I insisted, I told her in greater detail about the afternoon
they had spent at my house and I exaggerated a little about how much they
loved  each  other.  We  said  goodbye.  But  in  mid-June  Carmen  called  again,
desperate. Gino had been murdered in broad daylight in front of the pharmacy,
shot in the face. I thought first that she was giving me that news because the
son of the pharmacist was part of our early adolescence and, fascist or not,
certainly that event would upset me. But the reason was not to share with me
the horror of that violent death. The carabinieri had come and searched the
apartment from top to bottom, even the gas pump. They were looking for any
information that might lead them to Pasquale, and she had felt much worse
than when they had come to arrest her father for the murder of Don Achille.
82.
Carmen was overwhelmed by anxiety, she wept because of what seemed to
her the revival of persecution. I, on the other hand, couldn’t get out of my
mind the small barren square the pharmacy faced, and the shop’s interior,
which I had always liked for its odor of candies and syrups, the dark-wood
shelves with their rows of colored jars, and, above all, Gino’s parents, who were
so kind, leaning out from behind the counter as if from a balcony: surely they
had  been  there,  had  been  startled  by  the  sound  of  the  shots,  from  there,
perhaps, had watched, eyes wide, as their son fell in the doorway, had seen the
blood. I wanted to talk to Lila. But she appeared completely indifferent, she
dismissed the episode as one of many, she said only: Of course the carabinieri
would  go  after  Pasquale.  Her  voice  knew  how  to  grip  me  immediately,  to
persuade me; she emphasized that even if Pasquale had murdered Gino—which
she ruled out—she would be on his side, because the carabinieri should have
gone after the dead man for all the terrible things he had done, rather than our
friend,  a  construction  worker  and  Communist.  After  which,  in  the  tone  of
someone who is going on to more important things, she asked if she could
leave Gennaro with me until school began. Gennaro? How would I manage? I
already had Dede and Elsa, who wore me out. I said: “Why?”
“I have to work.”
“I’m about to go to the beach with the girls.”
“Take him, too.”
“I’m going to Viareggio and staying till the end of August. He barely knows
me, he’ll want you. If you come, too, that’s fine, but alone I don’t know.”
“You swore you’d take care of him.”
“Yes, but if you were ill.”
“And how do you know I’m not ill?”
“Are you ill?”
“No.”
“So why can’t you leave him with your mother or Stefano?”
She was silent for a few seconds, she became rude.
“Will you do me this favor or not?”
I gave in immediately.
“All right, bring him here.”
“Enzo will bring him.”
Enzo arrived on a Saturday night in a bright white Fiat 500 that he had just
bought. Merely seeing him from the window, hearing the dialect in which he
said something to the boy who was still in the car—it was him, identical, the
same composed gestures, the same physical compactness—gave solidity back
to Naples, to the neighborhood. I opened the door with Dede hanging on my
dress, and a single glance at Gennaro was enough to know that Melina, five
years  earlier,  had  seen  correctly:  the  child,  now  that  he  was  ten,  showed
plainly that he had in him not only nothing of Nino but nothing of Lila; he was,
rather, a perfect replica of Stefano.
The  observation  provoked  an  ambiguous  sentiment,  a  mixture  of
disappointment and satisfaction. I had thought that, since the boy would be
with me for so long, it would be nice to have in the house, along with my
daughters, a child of Nino; and yet I noted with pleasure that Nino had left Lila
nothing.
83.
Enzo  wanted  to  start  off  again  right  away,  but  Pietro  welcomed  him
courteously and obliged him to stay for the night. I tried to get Gennaro to play
with Dede, even if there was almost six years’ difference between them, but
while  she  was  clearly  eager  he  refused,  shaking  his  head  decisively.  I  was
struck by the way Enzo cared for the son who wasn’t his, indicating that he
knew his habits, his tastes, his needs. Although Gennaro protested because he
was sleepy, Enzo gently insisted that he pee and brush his teeth before going to
bed, and, when the child collapsed, he delicately undressed him and put his
pajamas on.
While I washed the dishes and cleaned up, Pietro entertained the guest. They
were sitting at the kitchen table; they had nothing in common. They tried
politics, but when my husband made a positive reference to the progressive
rapprochement of the Communists and the Christian Democrats, and Enzo said
that if that strategy prevailed Berlinguer would be giving a hand to the worst
enemies of the working class, they ended the discussion in order to avoid a
quarrel.  Pietro  then  politely  asked  him  about  his  job,  and  Enzo  must  have
found his interest sincere, because he was less laconic than usual and started
on a dry, perhaps slightly too technical account. IBM had just decided to send
Lila and him to a bigger company, a factory near Nola that had three hundred
technical workers and forty clerical employees. The financial offer had left
them stunned: three hundred and fifty thousand lire a month for him, who was
the department head, and a hundred thousand for her, as his assistant. They
had accepted, naturally, but now they had to earn all that money, and the work
to be done was really tremendous. We are responsible, he explained—and from
then on he used “we”—for a System 3 Model 10, and we have at our disposal
two operators and five punch-card operators, who are also checkers. We have
to collect and put into the System 3 a huge quantity of information, which is
necessary  so  that  the  machine  can  do  things  like—I  don’t  know—the
accounting,  wages,  invoicing,  the  warehousing,  management  of  the
salespeople, orders to suppliers, production, and shipping. For this purpose we
use little cards—that is, the punch cards. The holes are everything, the effort is
concentrated there. I’ll give you an example of the work it takes to program a
simple operation like issuing invoices. You begin with the paper invoices, on
which the warehouseman has marked both the products and the client they’ve
been delivered to. The client has a code, his personal information has a code,
and so do the products. The punch-card operators sit at the machines, press a
key to release the cards, then by typing on the keys reduce the bill number, the
client code, the personal-data code, the product-quantity code, to holes in the
cards. To help you understand, a thousand bills for ten products make ten
thousand punch cards with holes like the ones a needle would make: is it clear,
do you follow?
So the evening passed. Pietro every so often nodded to show that he was
following  and  even  tried  to  ask  some  questions  (The  holes  count  but  do  the
unperforated parts also count?). I confined myself to a half smile while I washed
and  polished.  Enzo  appeared  pleased  to  be  able  to  explain  to  a  university
professor, who listened to him like a disciplined student, and an old friend who
had her degree and had written a book, and now was tidying up the kitchen,
things that they knew nothing about. But in truth I was quickly distracted. An
operator took ten thousand cards and inserted them in a machine that was
called a sorter. The machine put them in order according to the product code.
Then there were two readers, not in the sense of people but in the sense of
machines programmed to read the holes and the non-holes in the cards. And
then? There I got lost. I got lost amid codes and the enormous packets of cards
and the holes that compared holes, that sorted holes, that read holes, that did
the four operations, that printed names, addresses, totals. I got lost following a
word I’d never heard before, file, which Enzo kept using, pronouncing it fi-le,
this file, that file, continually. I got lost following Lila, who knew everything
about those words, those machines, that work, and was doing that work now in
a big company in Nola, even if with the salary her companion was earning she
could be more of a lady than me. I got lost following Enzo, who could say
proudly: Without her I wouldn’t be able to do it. Thus he conveyed to us his love
and devotion, and it was clear that he liked to remind himself and others of the
extraordinary quality of his woman, whereas my husband never praised me
but, rather, reduced me to the mother of his children; even though I had had
an education he did not want me to be capable of independent thought, he
demeaned me by demeaning what I read, what interested me, what I said, and
he appeared willing to love me only provided that I continually demonstrate
my nothingness.
Finally I, too, sat down at the table, depressed because neither of the two
had made a move to say: Can we help you set the table, clear, wash the dishes,
sweep the floor. An invoice, Enzo was saying, is a simple document, what does
it take to do by hand? Nothing, if I have to create ten a day. But if I have to do a
thousand? The readers read two hundred cards a minute, so two thousand in
ten  minutes,  and  ten  thousand  in  fifty.  The  speed  of  the  machine  is  an
enormous advantage, especially if it’s enabled to do complex operations, which
require a lot of time. And that’s what Lila’s and my work is: to prepare the
System 3 to do complex operations. The development phases of the programs
are really wonderful. The operational phases a little less. The cards often jam
and break in the sorters. Very often a container in which the cards have just
been sorted falls and the cards scatter on the floor. But it’s great, it’s great even
then.
Just to feel that I was present, I interrupted, saying:
“Can he make a mistake?”
“He who?”
“The computer.”
“There’s no he, Lenù, he is me. If he makes a mistake, if he gets in trouble,
I’ve made a mistake, I’ve gotten in trouble.”
“Oh,” I said, and then, “I’m tired.”
Pietro  nodded  in  agreement  and  seemed  ready  to  end  the  evening.  He
turned to Enzo:
“It’s certainly exciting, but if it’s as you say, these machines will take the
place of men, and skills will disappear; at Fiat robots already do the welding. A
lot of jobs will be lost.”
Enzo at first agreed, then he seemed to have second thoughts, and finally he
resorted to the only person whose authority he credited:
“Lina  says  it’s  all  a  good  thing:  humiliating  and  stultifying  jobs  should
disappear.”
Lina, Lina, Lina. I asked teasingly: if Lina is so good, why do they give you
three hundred and fifty thousand lire and her a hundred thousand, why are
you the boss and she’s the assistant? Enzo hesitated again, he seemed on the
point of saying something pressing, which he then decided to abandon. He
mumbled: What do you want from me, private ownership of the means of
production should be abolished. In the kitchen the hum of the refrigerator
could be heard for a few seconds. Pietro stood up and said: Let’s go to bed.
84.
Enzo wanted to leave by six, but already at four in the morning I heard him
moving in his room and I got up to make him some coffee. In private, in the
silent house, the language of computers disappeared, along with the Italian
suited  to  Pietro’s  position,  and  we  moved  to  dialect.  I  asked  about  his
relationship with Lila. He said it was good, even though she never sat still. Now
she  was  chasing  after  work  problems,  now  she  was  squabbling  with  her
mother,  her  father,  her  brother,  now  she  was  helping  Gennaro  with  his
homework and, one way or another, she ended up helping Rino’s children, too,
and all the children who happened to be around. Lila didn’t look after herself,
and so she was overworked, she always seemed close to collapse, as she once
had;  she  was  tired.  I  quickly  understood  that  their  harmony  as  a  couple,
working side by side, blessed by good salaries, should be set within a more
complicated sequence. I ventured: “Maybe the two of you have to impose some
order: Lina shouldn’t get overtired.”
“I tell her that constantly.”
“And then there’s the separation, divorce: it makes no sense for her to stay
married to Stefano.”
“She doesn’t give a damn about that.”
“But Stefano?”
“He doesn’t even know that you can divorce now.”
“And Ada?”
“Ada has survival problems. The wheel turns, those who were on top end up
on the bottom. The Carraccis don’t have even a lira left, only debts with the
Solaras, and Ada is taking care to get what she can before it’s too late.”
“And you? You don’t want to get married?”
It was clear that he would happily get married, but Lila was against it. Not
only  did  she  not  want  to  waste  time  with  divorce—who  cares  if  I’m  still
married to him, I’m with you, I sleep with you, that’s the essential—but the
mere idea of another wedding made her laugh. She said: You and I? You and I
get married? Why, we’re fine like this, and as soon as we get fed up with each
other we go our own way. The prospect of another marriage didn’t interest
Lila, she had other things to think about.
“What?”
“Forget it.”
“Tell me.”
“She never talked to you about it?”
“What?”
“Michele Solara.”
He told me in brief, tense phrases that in all these years Michele had never
stopped asking Lila to work for him. He had proposed that she manage a new
shop on the Vomero. Or the accounting and the taxes. Or be a secretary for a
friend of his, an important Christian Democratic politician. He had even gone
so far as to offer her a salary of two hundred thousand lire a month just to
invent things, crazy notions, anything that came into her head. Even though
he lived on Posillipo, he still kept the headquarters of all his businesses in the
neighborhood, at his mother and father’s house. So Lila found him around her
constantly, on the street, in the market, in the shops. He stopped her, always
very friendly, he joked with Gennaro, gave him little gifts. Then he became
very  serious,  and  even  when  she  refused  the  jobs  he  offered,  he  wasn’t
impatient, he said goodbye, joking as usual: I’m not giving up, I’ll wait for you
for eternity, call me when you want and I’ll come running. Until he found out
she was working for IBM. That had angered him, and he had gone so far as to
get  people  he  knew  to  remove  Enzo  from  the  market  for  consultants,  and
hence Lila, too. He hadn’t had any success, IBM urgently needed technicians
and there weren’t many good technicians like Enzo and Lila. But the climate
had changed. Enzo had found Gino’s fascists outside the house and he escaped
because he managed to reach the front door in time and lock it behind him.
But  shortly  afterward  an  alarming  thing  had  happened  to  Gennaro.  Lila’s
mother had gone to pick him up at school as usual. All the students had come
out and the child was nowhere to be seen. The teacher: He was here a minute
ago. His classmates: He was here and then he disappeared. Nunzia, terribly
frightened, had called her daughter at work; Lila returned right away and went
to look for Gennaro. She found him on a bench in the gardens. The child was
sitting quietly, with his smock, his ribbon, his schoolbag, and he laughed at the
questions—where did you go, what did you do—with expressionless eyes. She
wanted to go and kill Michele right away, both for the attempted beating of
Enzo and the kidnapping of her son, but Enzo restrained her. The fascists now
went after anyone on the left and there was no proof that it was Michele who
ordered the kidnapping. As for Gennaro, he himself had admitted that his brief
absence was only an act of disobedience. In any case, once Lila calmed down,
Enzo had decided on his own to go and talk to Michele. He had showed up at
the Bar Solara and Michele had listened without batting an eye. Then he had
said, more or less: I don’t know what the fuck you’re talking about, Enzù: I’m
fond of Gennaro, anyone who touches him is dead, but among all the foolish
things you’ve said the only true thing is that Lina is smart and it’s a pity that
she’s wasting her intelligence, I’ve been asking her to work with me for years.
Then he continued: That irritates you? Who gives a damn. But you’re wrong, if
you love her you should encourage her to use her capabilities. Come here, sit
down, have a coffee and a pastry, tell me what those computers of yours do.
And it hadn’t ended there. They had met two or three times, by chance, and
Michele had demonstrated increasing interest in the System 3. One day he
even said, amused, that he had asked someone at IBM who was smarter, him or
Lila, and that person had said that Enzo was certainly smart, but the best in the
business was Lila. After that, he had stopped her on the street again and made
her a significant offer. He intended to rent the System 3 and use it in all his
commercial activities. Result: he wanted her as the chief technician, at four
hundred thousand lire a month.
“She didn’t even tell you that?” Enzo asked me warily.
“No.”
“You  see  she  didn’t  want  to  bother  you,  you  have  your  life.  but  you
understand that for her personally it would be a significant step up, and for the
two of us it would be a fortune: we’d have seven hundred and fifty thousand
lire a month altogether, I don’t know if that’s clear.”
“But Lina?”
“She has to answer by September.”
“And what will she do?”
“I don’t know. Have you ever been able to figure out what’s in her mind
ahead of time?”
“No. But what do you think she should do?”
“I think what she thinks.”
“Even if you don’t agree?”
“Even then.”
I went out to the car with him. On the stairs it occurred to me that maybe I
should tell him what he surely didn’t know, that Michele harbored for Lila a
love like a spiderweb, a dangerous love that had nothing to do with physical
possession or even with a loyal subservience. And I was about to do it, I was
fond of him, I didn’t want him to believe that he was merely dealing with a
quasi-camorrist who had been planning for a long time to buy the intelligence
of this woman. When he was already behind the wheel I asked him: “And if
Michele wants to sleep with her?”
He was impassive.
“I’ll kill him. But anyway he doesn’t want her, he already has a lover and
everybody knows it.”
“Who’s that?”
“Marisa, he’s got her pregnant again.”
For a moment it seemed to me that I hadn’t understood.
“Marisa Sarratore?”
“Marisa, the wife of Alfonso.”
I recalled my conversation with my schoolmate. He had tried to tell me how
complicated his life was and I had retreated, struck more by the surface of his
revelation than by the substance. And to me his uneasiness seemed confused—
to get things straight I would have had to talk to him again, and maybe not
even  then  would  I  have  understood—and  yet  it  pierced  me  unpleasantly,
painfully. I asked: “And Alfonso?”
“He doesn’t give a damn, they say he’s a fag.”
“Who says?”
“Everyone.”
“Everyone is very general, Enzo. What else does everyone say?”
He looked at me with a flash of conspiratorial irony: “A lot of things, the
neighborhood is always gossiping.”
“Like?”
“Old stories have come back to the surface. They say it was the mother of the
Solaras who murdered Don Achille.”
He left, and I hoped he would take away his words, too. But what I had
learned stayed with me, worried me, made me angry. In an attempt to get rid
of  it  I  went  to  the  telephone  and  talked  to  Lila,  mixing  anxieties  and
reproaches: Why didn’t you say anything about Michele’s job offers, especially
the last one; why did you tell Alfonso’s secret; why did you start that story
about the mother of the Solaras, it was a game of ours; why did you send me
Gennaro, are you worried about him, tell me plainly, I have the right to know;
why, once and for all, don’t you tell me what’s really in your mind? It was an
outburst,  but,  sentence  by  sentence,  deep  inside  myself,  I  hoped  that  we
wouldn’t stop there, that the old desire to confront our entire relationship and
re-examine it, to elucidate and have full consciousness of it, would be realized.
I  hoped  to  provoke  her  and  draw  her  in  to  other,  increasingly  personal
questions. But Lila was annoyed, she treated me coldly, she wasn’t in a good
mood. She answered that I had been gone for years, that I now had a life in
which the Solaras, Stefano, Marisa, Alfonso meant nothing, counted for less
than zero. Go on vacation, she said, abruptly, write, act the intellectual, here
we’ve remained too crude for you, stay away; and please, make Gennaro get
some sun, otherwise he’ll come home stunted like his father.
The  sarcasm  in  her  voice,  the  belittling,  almost  rude  tone,  removed  any
weight from Enzo’s story and eliminated any possibility of drawing her into
the books I was reading, the vocabulary I had learned from Mariarosa and the
Florentine women, the questions that I was trying to ask myself and that, once
I had provided her with the basic concepts, she would surely know how to take
on better than all of us. But yes, I thought, I’ll mind my own business and you
mind yours: if you like, don’t grow up, go on playing in the courtyard even now
that you’re about to turn thirty; I’ve had enough, I’m going to the beach. And
so I did.
85.
Pietro  took  the  three  children  and  me  in  the  car  to  an  ugly  house  in
Viareggio that we had rented, then he returned to Florence to try to finish his
book. Look, I said to myself, now I’m a vacationer, a well-off lady with three
children and a pile of toys, a beach umbrella in the front row, soft towels,
plenty to eat, five bikinis in different colors, menthol cigarettes, the sun that
darkens my skin and makes me even blonder. I called Pietro and Lila every
night. Pietro reported on people who had called for me, remnants of a distant
time, and, more rarely, talked about some hypothesis having to do with his
work that had just come to mind. I handed Lila to Gennaro, who reluctantly
recounted what he considered important events of his day and said good night.
I said almost nothing to either one or the other. Lila especially seemed reduced
to voice alone.
But I realized after a while that it wasn’t exactly so: part of her existed in
flesh and blood in Gennaro. The boy was certainly very like Stefano and didn’t
resemble Lila at all. Yet his gestures, the way he talked, some words, certain
interjections,  a  kind  of  aggressiveness  were  those  of  Lila  as  a  child.  So
sometimes if I was distracted I jumped at hearing his voice, or was spellbound
as I observed him gesticulating, explaining a game to Dede.
Unlike his mother, however, Gennaro was devious. Lila’s meanness when she
was a child had always been explicit, no punishment ever drove her to hide it.
Gennaro, on the other hand, played the role of the well-brought-up, even timid
child, but as soon as I turned my back he teased Dede, he hid her doll, he hit
her. When I threatened him, saying that as a punishment we wouldn’t call his
mamma to say good night he assumed a contrite expression. In reality, that
possible punishment didn’t worry him at all; the ritual of the evening phone
call  had  been  established  by  me,  and  he  could  easily  do  without  it.  What
worried him, rather, was the threat that I wouldn’t buy him ice cream. Then he
began to cry; between his sobs he said he wanted to go back to Naples, and I
immediately gave in. But that didn’t soothe him. He took revenge on me by
secretly being mean to Dede.
I  was  sure  that  she  feared  him,  hated  him.  But  no.  As  time  passed,  she
responded less and less to Gennaro’s harassments: she fell in love with him.
She called him Rino or Rinuccio, because he had told her that was what his
friends  called  him,  and  she  followed  him,  paying  no  attention  to  my
commands,  in  fact  it  was  she  who  urged  him  to  wander  away  from  our
umbrella.  My  day  was  made  up  of  shouting:  Dede  where  are  you  going,
Gennaro come here, Elsa what are you doing, don’t put sand in your mouth,
Gennaro stop it, Dede if you don’t stop it I’m coming over and we’ll see. A
pointless struggle: Elsa ate sand no matter what and, no matter what, Dede and
Gennaro disappeared.
Their refuge was a nearby expanse of reeds. Once I went with Elsa to see
what they were up to and discovered that they had taken off their bathing
suits and Dede was touching, with fascination, the erect penis that Gennaro
was showing her. I stopped a short distance away, I didn’t know what to do.
Dede—I knew, I had seen her—often masturbated lying on her stomach. But I
had read a lot about infant sexuality—I had even bought for my daughter a
little book of colored illustrations that explained in very short sentences what
happened between man and woman, words I had read her but which aroused
no interest—and, although I felt uneasy, I had not only forced myself not to
stop her, not to reproach her, but, assuming that her father would, I had been
careful to keep him from surprising her.
Now, though? Should I let them play together? Should I retreat, slip away?
Or approach without giving the thing any importance, talk nonchalantly about
something else? And if that violent boy, much bigger than Dede, forced on her
who knows what, hurt her? Wasn’t the difference in age a danger? Two things
precipitated the situation: Elsa saw her sister, shouted with joy, calling her
name; and at the same time I heard the dialect words that Gennaro was saying
to Dede, coarse words, the same horribly vulgar words I had learned as a child
in  the  courtyard.  I  couldn’t  control  myself,  everything  I  had  read  about
pleasures,  latencies,  neurosis,  polymorphous  perversions  of  children  and
women vanished, and I scolded the two severely, especially Gennaro, whom I
seized by the arm and dragged away. He burst into tears, and Dede said to me
coldly, fearless: You’re very mean.
I bought them both ice cream, but a period began in which a certain alarm at
how Dede’s language was absorbing obscene words of Neapolitan dialect was
added  to  a  wary  supervision,  intended  to  keep  the  episode  from  being
repeated. At night, while the children slept, I got into the habit of making an
effort  to  remember:  had  I  played  games  like  that  with  my  friends  in  the
courtyard? And had Lila had experiences of that type? We had never talked
about it. At the time we had uttered repulsive words, certainly, but they were
insults  that  served,  among  other  things,  to  ward  off  the  hands  of  obscene
adults, bad words that we shouted as we fled. For the rest? With difficulty I
reached the point of asking myself: had she and I ever touched each other? Had
I ever wished to, as a child, as a girl, as an adult? And her? I hovered on the
edge of those questions for a long time. I answered slowly: I don’t know, I don’t
want to know. And then I admitted that there had been a kind of admiration
for  her  body,  maybe  that,  yes,  but  I  ruled  out  anything  ever  happening
between us. Too much fear, if we had been seen we would have been beaten to
death.
In any case, on the days when I faced that problem, I avoided taking Gennaro
to the public phone. I was afraid he would tell Lila that he didn’t like being
with me anymore, that he would even tell her what had happened. That fear
annoyed me: why should I be concerned? I let it all fade. Even my vigilance
toward  the  two  children  slowly  diminished,  I  couldn’t  oversee  them
continuously. I devoted myself to Elsa, I forgot about them. I shouted nervously
from  the  shore,  towels  ready,  only  if,  despite  purple  lips  and  wrinkled
fingertips, they wouldn’t get out of the water.
The  days  of  August  slipped  away.  House,  shopping,  preparing  the
overflowing beach bags, beach, home again, dinner, ice cream, phone call. I
chatted with other mothers, all older than me, and I was pleased if they praised
my  children,  and  my  patience.  They  talked  about  husbands,  about  the
husbands’  jobs.  I  talked  about  mine,  I  said:  He’s  a  Latin  professor  at  the
university.  On  the  weekend  Pietro  arrived,  just  as,  years  earlier,  on  Ischia,
Stefano and Rino had. My acquaintances shot him respectful looks and seemed
to  appreciate,  thanks  to  his  professorship,  even  his  bushy  hair.  He  went
swimming  with  the  girls  and  Gennaro,  he  drew  them  into  make-believe
dangerous adventures that they all hugely enjoyed, then he sat studying under
the umbrella, complaining from time to time about his lack of sleep—he often
forgot the sleeping pills. In the kitchen, when the children were sleeping, we
had sex standing up to avoid the creaking of the bed. Marriage by now seemed
to me an institution that, contrary to what one might think, stripped coitus of
all humanity.
86.
It was Pietro who, one Saturday, picked out, in the crowd of headlines that
for days had been devoted to the ‘fascists’ bombing of the Italicus express
train, a brief news item in the Corriere della Sera that concerned a small factory
on the outskirts of Naples.
“Wasn’t Soccavo the name of the company where your friend worked?” he
asked me.
“What happened?”
He handed me the paper. A commando group made up of two men and a
woman had burst into a sausage factory on the outskirts of Naples. The three
had first shot the legs of the guard, Filippo Cara, who was in very serious
condition; then they had gone up to the office of the owner, Bruno Soccavo, a
young Neapolitan entrepreneur, and had killed him with four shots, three to
the chest and one to the head. I saw, as I read, Bruno’s face ruined, shattered,
along with his gleaming white teeth. Oh God, God, I was stunned. I left the
children with Pietro, I rushed to telephone Lila, the phone rang for a long time
with no answer. I tried again in the evening, nothing. I got her the next day,
she asked me in alarm: What’s the matter, is Gennaro ill? I reassured her, then
told her about Bruno. She knew nothing about it, she let me speak, finally she
said tonelessly: This is really bad news you’re giving me. And nothing else. I
goaded her: Telephone someone, find out, ask where I can send a telegram of
condolence. She said she no longer had any contact with anyone at the factory.
What telegram, she muttered, forget it.
I  forgot  it.  But  the  next  day  I  found  in  Il  Manifesto  an  article  signed  by
Giovanni Sarratore, that is, Nino, which had a lot of information about the
small Campanian business, underlining the political tensions present in those
backward places, and referring affectionately to Bruno and his tragic end. I
followed the development of the news for days, but to no purpose: it soon
disappeared from the papers. Besides, Lila refused to talk about it. At night I
called her with the children and she cut me off, saying, Give me Gennaro. She
became especially irritated when I quoted Nino to her. Typical of him, she
grumbled. He always has to interfere: What does politics have to do with it,
there must be other matters, here people are murdered for a thousand reasons,
adultery, criminal activity, even just one too many looks. So the days passed
and of Bruno there remained an image and that was all. It wasn’t the image of
the factory  owner  I  had  threated  on the  phone  using  the  authority  of  the
Airotas but that of the boy who had tried to kiss me and whom I had rudely
rejected.
87.
I began to have some ugly thoughts on the beach. Lila, I said to myself,
deliberately pushes away emotions, feelings. The more I sought tools to try to
explain myself to myself, the more she, on the contrary, hid. The more I tried
to draw her into the open and involve her in my desire to clarify, the more she
took  refuge  in  the  shadows.  She  was  like  the  full  moon  when  it  crouches
behind the forest and the branches scribble on its face.
In early September I returned to Florence, but the ugly thoughts rather than
dissolving  grew  stronger.  Useless  to  try  to  talk  to  Pietro.  He  was  unhappy
about the children’s and my return, he was late with his book and the idea that
the  academic  year  would  soon  begin  made  him  short-tempered.  One  night
when, at the table, Dede and Gennaro were quarreling about something or
other  he  jumped  up  suddenly  and  left  the  kitchen,  slamming  the  door  so
violently that the frosted glass shattered. I called Lila, I told her straight off
that she had to take her child back, he’d been living with me for a month and a
half.
“You can’t keep him till the end of the month?”
“No.”
“It’s bad here.”
“Here, too.”
Enzo left in the middle of the night and arrived in the morning, when Pietro
was at work. I had already packed Gennaro’s bag. I explained to him that the
tensions between the children had become unbearable, I was sorry but three
was too many, I couldn’t handle it anymore. He said he understood, he thanked
me for all I had done. He said only, by way of apology: You know what Lina is
like.  I  didn’t  answer,  because  Dede  was  yelling,  desperate  at  Gennaro’s
departure, and because, if I had, I might have said—beginning precisely with
what Lila was like—things I would later regret.
I had in my head thoughts I didn’t want to formulate even to myself; I was
afraid that the facts would magically fit the words. But I couldn’t cancel out the
sentences; in my mind I heard their syntax all ready, and I was frightened by it,
fascinated,  horrified,  seduced.  I  had  trained  myself  to  find  an  order  by
establishing connections between distant elements, but here it had got out of
hand. I had added Gino’s violent death to Bruno Soccavo’s (Filippo, the factory
guard, had survived). And I had arrived at the idea that each of these events led
to Pasquale, maybe also to Nadia. This hypothesis was extremely distressing. I
had thought of telephoning Carmen, to ask if she had news of her brother; then
I  changed  my  mind,  frightened  by  the  possibility  that  her  telephone  was
bugged. When Enzo came to get Gennaro I said to myself: Now I’ll talk to him
about it, let’s see how he responds. But then, too, I had said nothing, out of fear
of saying too much, out of fear of uttering the name of the figure who was
behind Pasquale and Nadia: Lila, that is. Lila, as usual: Lila who doesn’t say
things, she does them; Lila who is steeped in the culture of the neighborhood
and  takes  no  account  of  police,  the  law,  the  state,  but  believes  there  are
problems that can be resolved only with the shoemaker’s knife; Lila who knows
the  horror  of  inequality;  Lila  who,  at  the  time  of  the  collective  of  Via  dei
Tribunali,  found  in  revolutionary  theory  and  action  a  way  of  applying  her
hyperactive mind; Lila who has transformed into political objectives her rages
old and new; Lila who moves people like characters in a story; Lila who has
connected, is connecting, our personal knowledge of poverty and abuse to the
armed struggle against the fascists, against the owners, against capital. I admit
it here, openly, for the first time: in those September days I suspected that not
only Pasquale—Pasquale driven by his history toward the necessity of taking
up arms—not only Nadia, but Lila herself had spilled that blood. For a long
time, while I cooked, while I took care of my daughters, I saw her, with the
other two, shoot Gino, shoot Filippo, shoot Bruno Soccavo. And if I had trouble
imagining Pasquale and Nadia in every detail—I considered him a good boy,
something  of  a  braggart,  capable  of  fierce  fighting  but  of  murder  no;  she
seemed  to  me  a  respectable  girl  who  could  wound  at  most  with  verbal
treachery—about Lila I had never had doubts: she would know how to devise
the most effective plan, she would reduce the risks to a minimum, she would
keep fear under control, she would be able to give murderous intentions an
abstract purity, she knew how to remove human substance from bodies and
blood, she would have no scruples and no remorse, she would kill and feel that
she was in the right.
So there she was, clear and bright, along with the shadow of Pasquale, of
Nadia, of who knows what others. They drove through the piazza in a car and,
slowing down in front of the pharmacy, fired at Gino, at his thug’s body in the
white  smock.  Or  they  drove  along  the  dusty  road  to  the  Soccavo  factory,
garbage of every type piled up on either side. Pasquale went through the gate,
shot  Filippo’s  legs,  the  blood  spread  through  the  guard  booth,  screams,
terrified eyes. Lila, who knew the way well, crossed the courtyard, entered the
factory,  climbed  the  stairs,  burst  into  Bruno’s  office,  and,  just  as  he  said
cheerfully: Hi, what in the world are you doing around here, fired three shots
at his chest and one at his face.
Ah yes, militant anti-fascism, new resistance, proletarian justice, and other
formulas to which she, who instinctively knew how to avoid rehashing clichés,
was surely able to give depth. I imagined that those actions were necessary in
order  to  join,  I  don’t  know,  the  Red  Brigades,  Prima  Linea,  Nuclei  Armati
Proletari. Lila would disappear from the neighborhood as Pasquale had. Maybe
that’s why she had tried to leave Gennaro with me, apparently for a month, in
reality intending to give him to me forever. We would never see each other
again. Or she would be arrested, like the leaders of the Red Brigades, Curcio
and Franceschini. Or she would evade every policeman and prison, imaginative
and bold as she was. And when the big thing was accomplished, she would
reappear  triumphant,  admired  for  her  achievements,  in  the  guise  of  a
revolutionary leader, to tell me: You wanted to write novels, I created a novel
with real people, with real blood, in reality.
At night every imagining seemed a thing that had happened or was still
happening, and I was afraid for her, I saw her captured, wounded, like so many
women and men in the chaos of the world, and I felt pity for her, but I also
envied  her.  The  childish  conviction  that  she  had  always  been  destined  for
extraordinary things was magnified. And I regretted that I had left Naples,
detached myself from her, the need to be near her returned. But I was also
angry that she had set out on that road without consulting me, as if she hadn’t
considered me up to it. And yet I knew a lot about capital, exploitation, class
struggle,  the  inevitability  of  the  proletarian  revolution.  I  could  have  been
useful,  participated.  And  I  was  unhappy.  I  lay  in  bed,  discontent  with  my
situation  as  a  mother,  a  married  woman,  the  whole  future  debased  by  the
repetition of domestic rituals in the kitchen, in the marriage bed.
By day I felt more lucid, and the horror prevailed. I imagined a capricious
Lila  who  provoked  hatred  deliberately  and  in  the  end  found  herself  more
deeply involved in violent acts. Certainly she had had the courage to push
ahead,  to  take  the  lead  with  the  crystalline  determination,  the  generous
cruelty of one who is spurred by just reasons. But with what purpose? To start
a civil war? Transform the neighborhood, Naples, Italy into a battlefield, a
Vietnam in the Mediterranean? Hurl us all into a pitiless, interminable conflict,
squeezed  between  the  Eastern  bloc  and  the  Western?  Encourage  its  fiery
spread  throughout  Europe,  throughout  the  entire  planet?  Until  victory,
always? What victory? Cities destroyed, fire, the dead in the streets, the shame
of violent clashes not only with the class enemy but also within the front itself,
among  the  revolutionary  groups  of  various  regions  and  with  various
motivations, all in the name of the proletariat and its dictatorship. Maybe even
nuclear war.
I  closed  my  eyes  in  terror.  The  children,  the  future.  And  I  hung  on  to
formulas: the unpredictable subject, the destructive logic of patriarchy, the
feminine value of survival, compassion. I have to talk to Lila, I said to myself.
She has to tell me everything she’s doing, what she plans, so that I can decide
whether to be her accomplice or not.
But I never called nor did she call me. I was convinced that the long voice
thread that had been our only contact for years hadn’t helped us. We had
maintained  the  bond  between  our  two  stories,  but  by  subtraction.  We  had
become for each other abstract entities, so that now I could invent her for
myself both as an expert in computers and as a determined and implacable
urban guerrilla, while she, in all likelihood, could see me both as the stereotype
of  the  successful  intellectual  and  as  a  cultured  and  well-off  woman,  all
children, books, and highbrow conversation with an academic husband. We
both needed new depth, body, and yet we were distant and couldn’t give it to
each other.
88.
Thus  September  passed,  then  October.  I  didn’t  talk  to  anyone,  not  even
Adele, who had a lot of work, or even Mariarosa, who had brought Franco to
her house—an invalid Franco, in need of help, changed by depression—and
who greeted me warmly, promised to say hello to him for me, but then broke
off because she had too many things to do. Not to mention Pietro’s muteness.
The world outside books burdened him increasingly, he went reluctantly into
the regulated chaos of the university, and often said he was ill. He said he did it
in order to work, but he couldn’t get to the end of his book, he rarely went into
his study, and, as if to forgive himself and be forgiven, he took care of Elsa,
cooked, swept, washed, ironed. I had to treat him rudely to get him to go back
to teaching, but I immediately regretted it. Ever since the violence had struck
people I knew, I was afraid for him. He had never given in, even though he got
into dangerous situations, opposing publicly what, in a term that he preferred,
he called the load of nonsense of his students and many of his colleagues.
Although I was worried about him, in fact maybe just because I was worried, I
never  admitted  he  was  right.  I  hoped  that  if  I  criticized  him  he  would
understand, would stop his reactionary reformism (I used that phrase), become
more  flexible.  But,  in  his  eyes,  that  drove  me  yet  again  to  the  side  of  the
students who were attacking him, the professors who were plotting against
him.
It wasn’t like that, the situation was more complicated. On the one hand I
vaguely wanted to protect him, on the other I wanted to be on Lila’s side,
defend the choices I secretly attributed to her. To the point where every so
often I thought of telephoning her and, starting with Pietro, with our conflicts,
get her to tell me what she thought about it and, step by step, bring her out
into the open. I didn’t to it, naturally, it was absurd to expect sincerity on these
subjects on the phone. But one night she called me, sounding really happy.
“I have some good news.”
“What’s happening?”
“I’m the head of technology.”
“In what sense?”
“Head of the IBM data-processing center that Michele rented.”
It seemed incredible to me. I asked her to repeat it, to explain carefully. She
had accepted Solara’s proposal? After so much resistance she had gone back to
working  for  him,  as  in  the  days  of  Piazza  dei  Martiri?  She  said  yes,
enthusiastically, and became more and more excited, more explicit: Michele
had entrusted to her the System 3 that he had rented and placed in a shoe
warehouse in Acerra; she would employ operators and punch-card workers;
the salary was four hundred and twenty-five thousand lire a month.
I was disappointed. Not only had the image of the guerrilla vanished in an
instant but everything I thought I knew of Lila wavered. I said: “It’s the last
thing I would have expected of you.”
“What was I supposed to do?”
“Refuse.”
“Why?”
“We know what the Solaras are.”
“And so what? It’s already happened, and I’m better off working for Michele
than for that shit Soccavo.”
“Do as you like.”
I heard her breathing. She said: “I don’t like that tone, Lenù. I’m paid more
than Enzo, who is a man: What’s wrong with that?”
“Nothing.”
“The revolution, the workers, the new world, and that other bullshit?”
“Stop  it.  If  you’ve  unexpectedly  decided  to  make  a  truthful  speech  I’m
listening, otherwise let’s forget it.”
“May I point out something? You always use true and truthfully, when you
speak and when you write. Or you say: unexpectedly. But when do people ever
speak truthfully and when do things ever happen unexpectedly? You know better
than I that it’s all a fraud and that one thing follows another and then another.
I don’t do anything truthfully anymore, Lenù. And I’ve learned to pay attention
to things. Only idiots believe that they happen unexpectedly.”
“Bravo. What do you want me to believe, that you have everything under
control, that it’s you who are using Michele and not Michele you? Let’s forget
it, come on. Bye.”
“No, speak, say what you have to say.”
“I have nothing to say.”
“Speak, otherwise I will.”
“Then speak, let me listen.”
“You criticize me but you say nothing to your sister?”
I was astonished.
“What does my sister have to do with anything?”
“You don’t know anything about Elisa?”
“What should I know?”
She laughed maliciously.
“Ask your mother, your father, and your brothers.”
89.
She wouldn’t say anything else, she hung up, furious. I anxiously called my
parents’ house, my mother answered.
“Every so often you remember we exist,” she said.
“Ma, what’s happening to Elisa?”
“What happens to girls today.”
“What?”
“She’s with someone.”
“She’s engaged?”
“Let’s put it like that.”
“Who is she with?”
The answer went right through my heart.
“Marcello Solara.”
That’s what Lila wanted me to know. Marcello, the handsome Marcello of
our early adolescence, her stubborn, desperate admirer, the young man she
had humiliated by marrying Stefano Carracci, had taken my sister Elisa, the
youngest of the family, my good little sister, the woman whom I still thought of
as a magical child. And Elisa had let herself be taken. And my parents and my
brothers had not lifted a finger to stop him. And my whole family, and in some
way I myself, would end up related to the Solaras.
“Since when?” I asked.
“How do I know, a year.”
“And you two gave your consent?”
“Did you ask our consent? You did as you liked. And she did the same thing.”
“Pietro isn’t Marcello Solara.”
“You’re right: Marcello would never let himself be treated by Elisa the way
Pietro is treated by you.”
Silence.
“You could have told me, you could have consulted me.”
“Why?  You  left.  ‘I’ll  take  care  of  you,  don’t  worry.’  Hardly.  You’ve  only
thought of your own affairs, you didn’t give a damn about us.”
I decided to leave immediately for Naples with the children. I wanted to go
by train, but Pietro volunteered to drive us, passing off as kindness the fact
that he didn’t want to work. As soon as we came down from the Doganella and
were in the chaotic traffic of Naples, I felt gripped by the city, ruled by its
unwritten laws. I hadn’t set foot there since the day I left to get married. The
noise  seemed  unbearable,  I  was  irritated  by  the  constant  honking,  by  the
insults the drivers shouted at Pietro when, not knowing the way, he hesitated,
slowed down. A little before Piazza Carlo III I made him pull over. I got into the
driver’s seat, and drove aggressively to Via Firenze, to the same hotel he had
stayed in years before. We left our bags. I carefully dressed the two girls and
myself. Then we went to the neighborhood, to my parents’ house. What did I
think I could do, impose on Elisa my authority as the older sister, a university
graduate, well married? Persuade her to break her engagement? Tell her: I’ve
known Marcello since he grabbed my wrist and tried to pull me into the Fiat
1100,  breaking  Mamma’s  silver  bracelet,  so  trust  me,  he’s  a  vulgar,  violent
man? Yes. I felt determined, my job was to pull Elisa out of that trap.
My mother greeted Pietro affectionately and, in turn—This is for Dede from
Grandma,  this  is  for  Elsa—she  gave  the  two  girls  many  small  gifts  that,  in
different ways, excited them. My father’s voice was hoarse with emotion, he
seemed thinner, even more subservient. I waited for my brothers to appear,
but I discovered that they weren’t home.
“They’re always at work,” my father said without enthusiasm.
“What do they do?”
“They work,” my mother broke in.
“Where?”
“Marcello arranged jobs for them.”
I remembered how the Solaras had arranged a job for Antonio, what they had
made him into.
“Doing what?” I asked.
My  mother  answered  in  irritation:  “They  bring  money  home  and  that’s
enough. Elisa isn’t like you, Lenù, Elisa thinks of all of us.”
I pretended not to hear: “Did you tell her I was coming today? Where is
she?”
My father lowered his gaze, my mother said curtly: “At her house.”
I became angry: “She doesn’t live here anymore?”
“No.”
“Since when?”
“Almost two months. She and Marcello have a nice apartment in the new
neighborhood,” my mother said coldly.
90.
He was more than just a boyfriend, then. I wanted to go to Elisa’s house right
away, even though my mother kept saying: What are you doing, your sister is
preparing a surprise for you, stay here, we’ll all go together later. I paid no
attention. I telephoned Elisa, she answered happily and yet embarrassed. I said:
Wait for me, I’m coming. I left Pietro and the girls with my parents and set off
on foot.
The neighborhood seemed to me more run-down: the buildings dilapidated,
the streets and sidewalks full of holes, littered with garbage. From black-edged
posters that carpeted the walls—I had never seen so many—I learned that the
old man Ugo Solara, Marcello and Michele’s grandfather, had died. As the date
attested, the event wasn’t recent—it went back at least two months—and the
high-flown phrases, the faces of grieving Madonnas, the very name of the dead
man were faded, smudged. Yet the death notices persisted on the streets as if
the  other  dead,  out  of  respect,  had  decided  to  disappear  from  the  world
without letting anyone know. I saw several even at the entrance to Stefano’s
grocery. The shop was open, but it seemed to me a hole in the wall, dark,
deserted,  and  Carracci  appeared  in  the  back,  in  his  white  smock,  and
disappeared like a ghost.
I climbed up toward the railroad, passing what we used to call the new
grocery. The lowered shutter, partly off its tracks, was rusty and defaced by
obscene words and drawings. That whole part of the neighborhood appeared
abandoned, the shiny white of long ago had turned gray, the plaster had flaked
off in places, revealing the bricks. I walked by the building where Lila had
lived. Few of the stunted trees had survived. Packing tape held together the
crack  in  the  glass  of  the  front  door.  Elisa  lived  farther  on,  in  a  better
maintained area, more pretentious. The porter, a small bald man with a thin
mustache, appeared, and stopped me, asking with hostility who I was looking
for. I didn’t know what to say. I muttered, Solara. He became deferential and
let me go.
Only in the elevator did I realize that my entire self had in a sense slid
backward. What would have seemed to me acceptable in Milan or Florence—a
woman’s freedom to dispose of her own body and her own desires, living with
someone  outside  of  marriage—there  in  the  neighborhood  seemed
inconceivable: at stake was my sister’s future, I couldn’t control myself. Elisa
had set up house with a dangerous person like Marcello? And my mother was
pleased? She who had been enraged because I was married in a civil and not a
religious ceremony; she who considered Lila a whore because she lived with
Enzo, and Ada a prostitute because she had become Stefano’s lover: she allowed
her young daughter to sleep with Marcello Solara—a bad person—outside of
marriage? I had thoughts of that sort as I went up to Elisa’s, and a rage that I
felt was justified. But my mind—my disciplined mind—was confused, I didn’t
know what arguments I would resort to. Those my mother would have asserted
until a few years before, if I had made such a choice? Would I therefore regress
to a level that she had left behind? Or should I say: Go and live with whoever
you like but not with Marcello Solara? Should I say that? But what girl, today,
in Florence, in Milan, would I ever force to leave a man, whoever he was, if she
was in love with him?
When Elisa opened the door, I hugged her so hard that she said, laughing:
You’re hurting me. I felt her alarm as she invited me to sit down in the living
room—a showy room full of flowered sofas and chairs with gilded backs—and
began to speak quickly, but of other things: how well I looked, what pretty
earrings I was wearing, what a nice necklace, how chic I was, she was so eager
to meet Dede and Elsa. I described her nieces in detail, I took off my earrings,
made her try them at the mirror, gave them to her. I saw her brighten; she
laughed and said:
“I  was  afraid  you’d  come  to  scold  me,  to  say  you  were  opposed  to  my
relationship with Marcello.”
I stared at her for a long moment, I said:
“Elisa, I am opposed to it. And I made this trip purposely to tell you, Mamma,
Papa, and our brothers.”
Her expression changed; her eyes filled with tears.
“Now you’re upsetting me: why are you against it?”
“The Solaras are terrible people.”
“Not Marcello.”
She began to tell me about him. She said it had started when I was pregnant
with Elsa. Our mother had left to stay with me and she had found all the weight
of  the  family  on  her.  Once  when  she  had  gone  to  do  the  shopping  at  the
Solaras’ supermarket, Rino, Lila’s brother, had said that if she left the list of
what she needed he would have it delivered. And while Rino was talking, she
noticed that Marcello gave her a nod of greeting as if to let her know that that
order had been given by him. From then on he had begun to hang around,
doing kind things for her. Elisa had said to herself: He’s old, I don’t like him.
But he had become increasingly present in her life, always courteous, there
hadn’t been a word or a gesture that recalled the hateful side of the Solaras.
Marcello  was  really  a  respectable  person,  with  him  she  felt  safe,  he  had  a
strength, an authority, that made him seem ten meters tall. Not only that.
From the moment it became clear that he was interested in her, Elisa’s life had
changed. Everyone, in the neighborhood and outside it, had begun to treat her
like  a  queen,  everyone  had  begun  to  consider  her  important.  It  was  a
wonderful feeling, she wasn’t yet used to it. Before, she said, you’re nobody,
and right afterward even the mice in the sewer grates know you: of course,
you’ve written a book, you’re famous, you’re used to it, but I’m not, I was
astonished. It had been thrilling to discover that she didn’t have to worry
about  anything.  Marcello  took  care  of  it  all,  every  desire  of  hers  was  a
command for him. So as time passed she fell in love. In the end she had said
yes. And now if a day went by and she didn’t see or hear from him, she was
awake all night crying.
Elisa was convinced that she had had an unimaginable stroke of luck and I
knew that I wouldn’t have the strength to spoil all that happiness. Especially
since she didn’t offer me any opportunity: Marcello was capable, Marcello was
responsible, Marcello was handsome, Marcello was perfect. With every word
she uttered she was careful either to keep him separate from the Solara family
or  to  speak  with  cautious  liking  for  his  mother,  or  his  father,  who  had  a
stomach  disease,  and  almost  never  left  the  house,  or  of  the  deceased
grandfather, sometimes even of Michele, who, if you spent time with him, also
seemed different from the way people judged him; he was very affectionate. So
believe me, she said, I’ve never been so happy since I was born, and even
Mamma, and you know what she’s like, is on my side, even Papa, and Gianni
and Peppe, who until a short time ago spent their days doing nothing, now
Marcello employs them, paying them really well.
“If that’s really the way things are, get married,” I said.
“We will. But now isn’t a good time, Marcello says he has to settle some
complicated  business  affairs.  And  then  there’s  the  mourning  for  his
grandfather, poor man, he lost his mind, he couldn’t remember how to walk, or
even how to speak, by taking him God set him free. But as soon as things calm
down we’ll get married, don’t worry. And then, before you get married, it’s
better to see if you get along, isn’t it?”
She began to speak in words that weren’t hers, the words of a modern girl
picked up from the comic books she read. I compared them with the ones I
would have uttered on those same subjects and I realized that they weren’t
very different, Elisa’s words only seemed a little coarser. How to respond? I
didn’t know at the start of that visit, and I don’t know now. I could have said:
There’s not much to say, Elisa, it’s all clear: Marcello will consume you, he’ll get
used to your body, he’ll leave you. But they were words that sounded old, not
even my mother had dared to say them. So I resigned myself. I had gone away,
Elisa had stayed. What would I have been if I, too, had stayed, what choices
would I have made? Hadn’t I, too, liked the Solara boys when I was a girl? And
besides, what had I gained by leaving? Not even the capacity to find words of
wisdom to persuade my sister not to ruin herself. Elisa had a pretty face with
delicate  features,  an  unremarkable  body,  a  caressing  voice.  Marcello  I
remembered as tall, handsome, muscular, he had a square face with a healthy
complexion, and was capable of intense feelings of love: he had demonstrated
that when he was in love with Lila, it didn’t seem that he’d had other loves
since. What to say, then? In the end she went to get a box and showed me all
the jewelry Marcello had given her, objects compared to which the earrings I
had given her were what they were, small things.
“Be careful,” I said. “Don’t lose yourself. And if you need to, call me.”
I was about to get up, but she stopped me, laughing.
“Where are you going, didn’t Mamma tell you? They’re all coming here for
dinner. I’ve made a huge amount of food.”
I showed my annoyance:
“All who?”
“Everyone: it’s a surprise.”
91.
The first to arrive were my father and mother, with the two little girls and
Pietro. Dede and Elsa received more presents from Elisa, who fussed over them
(Dede, sweetie, give me a big kiss here; Elsa, how nice and plump you are, come to your
aunt, you know we have the same name?). My mother disappeared immediately
into the kitchen, head down, without looking at me. Pietro tried to pull me
aside to tell me I don’t know what serious thing but with the air of one who
wants to declare his innocence. Instead, my father dragged him over to sit on a
couch in front of the television and turned it on at high volume.
Soon afterward Gigliola appeared with her children, two fierce boys who
immediately ganged up with Dede, while Elsa, bewildered, took refuge with me.
Gigliola was fresh from the hairdresser, her extremely high heels clacked on
the floor, she sparkled with gold, in her ears, around her neck, on her arms. A
bright green dress, with a very low décolletage, barely contained her, and she
wore heavy makeup that was already cracking. She turned to me and said
without preamble, sarcastically:
“Here we are, we’ve come to honor you professors. Everything good, Lenù?
Is that the genius of the university? My goodness, what nice hair your husband
has.”
Pietro freed himself from my father, who had an arm around his shoulders,
jumped  up  with  a  timid  smile,  and  couldn’t  restrain  himself,  his  gaze
instinctively rested on the large wave of Gigliola’s breasts. She noted it with
satisfaction.
“Easy, easy,” she said to him, “or I’ll be embarrassed. Here no one ever gets
up to greet a lady.”
My father pulled my husband back, worried that someone would take him
away, and started talking to him again about something or other, in spite of
the booming television. I asked Gigliola how she was, trying to convey to her
with my gaze, my tone of voice, that I hadn’t forgotten her confidences and
was close to her. The idea must not have pleased her, she said:
“Listen, sweetheart, I’m fine, you’re fine, we’re all fine. But if my husband
hadn’t ordered me to come here and bore my ass off, I’d be much better off at
my house. Just to be clear.”
I  couldn’t  answer,  someone  was  ringing  the  doorbell.  My  sister  moved
lightly, she seemed to glide on a breath of wind, she hurried to open the door. I
heard  her  exclaim:  How  happy  I  am,  come,  Mamma,  come  in.  And  she
reappeared, holding by the hand her future mother-in-law, Manuela Solara,
who was dressed for a party, a fake flower in her dyed reddish hair, sorrowful
eyes set in deep sockets, even thinner than the last time I’d seen her—almost
skin and bone. Behind her was Michele, well dressed, carefully shaved, with a
brusque  power  in  his  gaze  and  in  his  calm  movements.  And  a  moment
afterward appeared a big man I had trouble recognizing, everything about him
was enormous: he was tall, with big feet, long large powerful legs, his stomach
and chest and shoulders inflated by some heavy, compact material; he had a
large head with a broad forehead, his long brown hair was combed back, his
beard was coal-black. It was Marcello: Elisa confirmed it by offering her lips as
if to a god to whom one owes respect and gratitude. He bent over, brushing
hers with his, while my father rose, pulling up Pietro, too, with an embarrassed
air,  and  my  mother  hurried  limping  from  the  kitchen.  I  realized  that  the
presence of Signora Solara was considered exceptional, a thing to be proud of.
Elisa whispered to me with emotion: Today my mother-in-law is sixty. Ah, I
said, and meanwhile I was surprised to see Marcello, as soon as he came in,
turn directly to my husband as if they already knew each other. He gave him a
bright smile, shouting: Everything’s taken care of, Prof. What everything was
taken care of? Pietro responded with an uncertain smile, then he looked at me,
shaking his head in distress, as if to say: I did everything I could. I would have
liked him to explain, but already Marcello was introducing Manuela: Come,
Mamma, this is the professor husband of Lenuccia, sit down here next to him.
Pietro made a half bow, and I, too, felt compelled to greet Signora Solara, who
said: How pretty you are Lenù, you’re pretty like your sister, and then she
asked  me  with  some  anxiety:  It’s  warm  in  here,  don’t  you  feel  it?  I  didn’t
answer, Dede was whining, calling me, Gigliola—the only one who appeared to
give no importance to the presence of Manuela—shouted something vulgar in
dialect to her children who had hit mine. I realized that Michele was studying
me silently, without even saying hello. I greeted him, in a loud voice, then tried
to soothe Dede and Elsa, who, seeing her sister distressed, was about to start
crying in turn. Marcello said to me: I’m so happy to have you as a guest in my
house, it’s a great honor for me, believe me. He turned to Elisa as if to speak
directly to me were beyond his powers: You tell her how pleased I am, your
sister intimidates me. I said something to put him at ease, but at that moment
the doorbell rang again.
Michele went to the door, and he returned shortly afterward with a look of
amusement. He was followed by an old man who was carrying suitcases, my
suitcases, the suitcases we had left in the hotel. Michele gestured toward me,
the man placed them in front of me as if he had performed a magic trick for my
entertainment.  No,  I  exclaimed,  oh  no,  you’re  making  me  angry.  But  Elisa
embraced me, kissed me, said: We have room, you can’t stay in a hotel, we have
so much space here, and two bathrooms. Anyway, Marcello said emphatically, I
asked your husband for permission, I wouldn’t have dared take the initiative:
Prof, please talk to your wife, defend me. I gasped, furious but smiling: Good
Lord, what a mess, thank you Marcè, you’re very kind, but we really can’t
accept. And I tried to send the suitcases back to the hotel. But I also had to
attend to Dede, I said to her: Let me see what the boys did, it’s nothing, a little
kiss will make it go away, go play, take Elsa. And I called Pietro, already caught
in the coils of Manuela Solara: Pietro, come here, please, what did you say to
Marcello, we can’t sleep here. And I realized that my voice was taking on the
tones of the dialect, out of nervousness, that words were coming to me in the
Neapolitan of the neighborhood, that the neighborhood—from the courtyard
to the stradone and the tunnel—was imposing its language on me, its mode of
acting and reacting, its figures, those which in Florence seemed faded images
and here were flesh and blood.
There was another ring at the door, Elisa went to open it. Who else was still
to arrive? A few seconds passed and Gennaro rushed into the room. He saw
Dede, Dede saw him, incredulous. She immediately stopped whining, and they
stared  at  each  other,  overwhelmed  by  that  unexpected  reunion.  Right
afterward Enzo appeared, the only blond among so many dark-haired people
and bright colors, and yet he was grim. Finally Lila entered.
92.
A long period of words without body, of voice alone that ran in waves over
an electric sea, suddenly shattered. Lila wore a knee-length blue dress. She was
thin, all sinews, which made her seem taller than usual in spite of her low
heels. She had deep wrinkles at the sides of her mouth and her eyes, otherwise
the pale skin of her face was stretched over the forehead, the cheekbones. Her
hair, combed into a ponytail, showed threads of white over her ears, which
were almost without lobes. As soon as she saw me she smiled, she narrowed
her eyes. I didn’t smile and was so surprised I said nothing, not even hello.
Although we were both thirty years old, she seemed older, more worn than I
imagined I was. Gigliola shouted: Finally the other little queen is here, the
children are hungry, I can’t control them anymore.
We  ate.  I  felt  as  if  I  were  being  squeezed  in  an  uncomfortable  device;  I
couldn’t swallow. I thought angrily of the suitcases, which I had unpacked in
the hotel and which had been arbitrarily repacked by one or more strangers,
people who had touched my things, Pietro’s, the children’s, making a mess. I
couldn’t  accept  the  evidence—that  I  would  sleep  in  the  house  of  Marcello
Solara to please my sister, who shared his bed. I watched, with a hostility that
grieved  me,  Elisa  and  my  mother,  the  first,  overwhelmed  by  an  anxious
happiness, talking on and on as she played the part of mistress of the house,
the  second  appearing  content,  so  content  that  she  even  filled  Lila’s  plate
politely. I observed Enzo, who ate with his head down, annoyed by Gigliola,
who  pressed  her  enormous  bosom  against  his  arm  and  talked  in  loud,
flirtatious tones. I looked with irritation at Pietro, who, although assailed by
my father, by Marcello, by Signora Solara, paid attention only to Lila, who sat
opposite him and was indifferent to everyone, even to me—maybe especially to
me—but not to him. And the children got on my nerves, the five new lives who
had arranged themselves into two groups: Gennaro and Dede, well-behaved
and  devious,  against  Gigliola’s  children,  who,  drinking  wine  from  their
distracted mother’s glass, were becoming intolerable, and now appealing to
Elsa, who had joined them, even if they took no notice of her.
Who had put on this show? Who had mixed together different reasons to
celebrate?  Elisa  obviously,  but  pushed  by  whom?  Maybe  by  Marcello.  But
Marcello had surely been directed by Michele, who was sitting next to me, and
who, at his ease, ate, drank, pretended to ignore the behavior of his wife and
children, but stared ironically at my husband, who seemed fascinated by Lila.
What did he want to prove? That this was the territory of the Solaras? That
even if I had escaped I belonged to that place and therefore to them? That they
could force on me anything by mobilizing affections, vocabulary, rituals, but
also by destroying them, by making at their convenience the ugly beautiful and
the beautiful ugly? He spoke to me for the first time since he had arrived. Did
you see Mamma, he said, imagine, she’s sixty, but who would ever say so, look
how pretty she is, she carries it well, no? He raised his voice on purpose, so
that everyone could hear not so much his question as the answer that I was
now obliged to give. I had to speak in praise of Mamma. Here she was, sitting
next  to  Pietro,  an  old  woman  who  was  a  little  vague,  polite,  apparently
innocuous, with a long bony face, a massive nose, that crazy flower in her
thinning hair. And yet she was the loan shark who had founded the family
fortunes; the caretaker and guardian of the red book in which were the names
of so many in the neighborhood, the city, and the province; the woman of the
crime without punishment, a ruthless and dangerous woman, according to the
telephonic fantasy I had indulged in, along with Lila, and according to the
pages of my aborted novel: Mamma who had killed Don Achille, to replace him
and gain a monopoly on loan-sharking, and who had brought up her two sons
to seize everything, trampling on everyone. And now I had the obligation to
say to Michele: Yes, it’s true, how pretty your mother looks, how well she
carries her years, congratulations. And I saw out of the corner of my eye that
Lila had stopped talking to Pietro and expected nothing else, already she was
turning to look at me, her full lips parted, her eyes cracks, her brow furrowed. I
read the sarcasm in her face, it occurred to me that maybe she had suggested
to Michele that he put me in that cage: Mamma’s just turned sixty, Lenù, the
mamma of your brother-in-law, your sister’s mother-in-law, let’s see what you say now,
let’s see if you continue to play the schoolmistress. I responded, turning to Manuela,
Happy Birthday, nothing else. And immediately Marcello broke in, as if to help
me, he exclaimed, with emotion: Thank you, thank you, Lenù. Then he turned
to his mother; her face was pained, sweaty, and red blotches had appeared on
her skinny neck: Lenuccia has congratulated you, Mamma. And immediately
Pietro said to the woman who was sitting next to him: Happy Birthday also
from me, Signora. And so everyone—everyone except Gigliola and Lila—paid
respects to Signora Solara, even the children, in chorus: Many happy returns,
Manuela, many happy returns, Grandma. And she shied away, saying, I’m old,
and,  taking  out  of  her  purse  a  blue  fan  with  the  image  of  the  gulf  and  a
smoking  Vesuvio,  she  began  to  fan  herself,  slowly  at  first,  then  more
energetically.
Michele, although he had turned to me, seemed to give my husband’s good
wishes more importance. He spoke to him politely: too kind, Prof, you aren’t
from here and you can’t know the good qualities of our mother. He assumed a
confidential tone: We’re good folk, my late grandfather, rest his soul, started
out  with  the  bar  here  at  the  corner,  started  from  nothing,  and  my  father
expanded it, he made a pastry shop that’s famous in all Naples, thanks also to
the skill of Spagnuolo, my wife’s father, an extraordinary artisan—right, Gigliò?
But, he added, it’s to my mother, to our mother, that we owe everything. In
recent times envious people, people who wish us harm, have spread odious
rumors about her. But we are tolerant people, life has taught us to stay in
business and to be patient. So the truth always prevails. And the truth is that
this  woman  is  extremely  intelligent,  she  has  a  strong  character;  there  has
never been a moment when it would even cross your mind that she has the
desire to do nothing. She has always worked, always, and she has done it only
for the family, she never enjoyed anything for herself. What we have today is
what she built for us children, what we do today is only the continuation of
what she did.
Manuela fanned herself with a more deliberate gesture, she said aloud to
Pietro:  Michele  is  a  wonderful  son.  When  he  was  a  child,  at  Christmas,  he
would climb up on the table and recite poetry beautifully; but his flaw is that
he likes to talk and when he talks he has to exaggerate. Marcello interrupted:
No, Mamma, what exaggeration, it’s all true. And Michele continued to sing
Manuela’s praises, how beautiful she was, how generous, he wouldn’t stop.
Until suddenly he turned to me. He said seriously, in fact solemnly: There’s
only one other woman who is almost like our mother. Another woman? A woman
almost  comparable  to  Manuela  Solara?  I  looked  at  him  in  bewilderment.  The
phrase, in spite of that almost, was out of place, and for a few instants the noisy
dinner became soundless. Gigliola stared at her husband with nervous eyes, the
pupils  dilated  by  wine  and  unhappiness.  My  mother,  too,  assumed  an
expression that was unsuitable, watchful: Maybe she hoped that that woman
was Elisa, that Michele was about to assign to her daughter a sort of right of
succession to the most elevated seat among the Solaras. And Manuela stopped
fanning herself for a moment, she dried with her index finger the sweat on her
lips, she waited for her son to upend those words in a mocking remark.
But, with the audacity that had always distinguished him, not giving a damn
about his wife or Enzo or even his mother, he stared at Lila while his face
turned a greenish color and his gestures became more agitated and his words
served as a rope, dragging her attention away from Pietro. Tonight, he said,
we’re all here, at my brother’s house, first to welcome as they deserve these
two esteemed professors and their beautiful children; second to celebrate my
mother, the most blessed woman, third to wish Elisa great happiness and, soon,
a fine marriage; fourth, if you will allow me, to toast an agreement that I was
afraid would never be made. Lina, please, come here.
Lina. Lila.
I sought her gaze and she looked back for a fraction of a second, a look that
said: Now do you understand the game, you remember how it works? Then, to
my  great  surprise,  while  Enzo  stared  at  an  indeterminate  point  on  the
tablecloth, she rose meekly and came over to Michele.
He didn’t touch her. He didn’t touch a hand, an arm, nothing, as if between
them hung a blade that could wound him. Instead he placed his fingers for
several  seconds  on  my  shoulder  and  turned  to  me  again:  You  mustn’t  be
offended,  Lenù,  you’re  smart,  you’ve  gone  so  far,  you’ve  been  in  the
newspapers, you’re the pride of us all who have known you since you were a
child. But—and I’m sure you agree, and you’ll be pleased if I say it now, because
you  love  her—Lina  has  something  alive  in  her  mind  that  no  one  else  has,
something strong, that jumps here and there and nothing can stop it, a thing
that not even the doctors can see and that I think not even she knows, even
though it’s been there since she was born—she doesn’t know it and doesn’t
want to recognize it, look what a mean face she’s making right now—a thing
that, if it doesn’t like you can cause you a lot of problems but, if it does, leaves
everyone astonished. Well, for a long time I’ve wanted to buy this distinctive
aspect of her. Yes, buy, there’s nothing wrong, buy the way you buy pearls,
diamonds. But until now, unfortunately, it was impossible. We’ve made just a
small step forward, and it’s this small step that I wish to celebrate tonight: I’ve
hired Signora Cerullo to work in the data-processing center that I’ve set up in
Acerra, a very modern thing that if it interests you, Lenù, if it interests the
professor, I’ll take you to visit tomorrow, or anyway before you leave. What do
you say, Lina?
Lila made an expression of disgust. She shook her head unhappily and said,
staring  at  Signora  Solara:  Michele  doesn’t  understand  anything  about
computers and I don’t know what he thinks that I do, but it’s nonsense, it just
takes a correspondence course, I learned it even though I only went up to fifth
grade  in  school.  And  she  said  nothing  else.  She  didn’t  mock  Michele,  as  I
expected she would, because of that tremendous image he had invented, the
living thing that flowed in her mind. She didn’t mock him for the pearls, the
diamonds. Above all, she didn’t evade the compliments. In fact she allowed us
to toast her hiring as if she really had been assumed into Heaven, she allowed
Michele to continue to praise her, justifying with his praise the salary he was
paying her. And all while Pietro, with that capacity of his for feeling at ease
with people he considered inferior, was already saying, without consulting me,
that he would very much like to visit the center in Acerra and he wanted to
hear about it from Lila, who had sat down again. I thought for a moment that if
I gave her time she would take away my husband as she had taken Nino from
me. But I didn’t feel jealous: if it happened it would happen only out of a desire
to dig a deeper furrow between us, I took it for granted that she couldn’t like
Pietro and that Pietro would never be capable of betraying me out of desire for
someone else.
Another feeling, however, came over me, a more tangled one. I was in the
place where I was born, I had always been considered the girl who had been
most  successful,  I  was  convinced  that  it  was,  at  least  in  that  place,  an
indisputable  fact.  Instead  Michele,  as  if  he  had  deliberately  organized  my
demotion in the neighborhood and in particular in the midst of the family I
came from, had contrived to make Lila overshadow me, he had even wanted
me  to  comply  with  my  overshadowing  by  publicly  recognizing  the
incomparable power of my friend. And she had willingly agreed to it. In fact,
maybe she had even had a hand in the result, planning and organizing it. If a
few  years  earlier,  when  I  had  had  my  little  success  as  a  writer,  the  thing
wouldn’t have wounded me, in fact would have pleased me, now that that was
over I realized that I was suffering. I exchanged a look with my mother. She
was frowning, she had the expression she assumed when she was struggling
not to hit me. She wanted me not to pretend my usual meekness, she wanted
me to react, to show how much I knew, all the high-quality stuff, not that
nonsense  of  Acerra.  She  was  saying  it  to  me  with  her  eyes,  like  a  mute
command.  But  I  said  nothing.  Suddenly  Manuela  Solara,  darting  glances  of
impatience, exclaimed: I feel hot, don’t you all, too?
93.
Elisa, like my mother, could not tolerate my loss of prestige. But while my
mother remained silent, she turned to me, radiant, affectionate, to let me know
that I remained her extraordinary older sister, whom she would always be
proud  of.  I  have  something  to  give  you,  she  said,  and  added,  jumping
lightheartedly, as was her way, from one subject to another: Have you ever
been in an airplane? I said no. Possible? Possible. It turned out that of those
present only Pietro had flown, several times, but he spoke of it as if it were
nothing much. Instead for Elisa it had been a wonderful experience, and also
for Marcello. They had gone to Germany, a long flight, for reasons of work and
pleasure. Elisa had been afraid at first, because of the jolting and shaking, and a
jet of cold air struck her right in the head as if it were going to drill a hole.
Then through the window she had seen white clouds below and blue sky above.
So she had discovered that above the clouds there was always fine weather,
and from high up the earth was all green and blue and violet and shining with
snow when they flew over the mountains. She asked me: “Guess who we met in
Düsseldorf.”
I said, unhappy with everything: “I don’t know, Elisa, tell me.”
“Antonio.”
“Ah.”
“He was very eager for me to send his greetings.”
“Is he well?”
“Very well. He gave me a gift for you.”
So that was the thing she had for me, a gift from Antonio. She got up and
went  to  get  it.  Marcello  looked  at  me  with  a  smile,  Pietro  asked:  “Who  is
Antonio?”
“An employee of ours,” said Marcello.
“A boyfriend of your wife,” said Michele, laughing. “Times have changed,
Professò, today women have a lot of boyfriends and they boast about it much
more than men. How many girlfriends have you had?”
Pietro said seriously:
“None, I’ve loved only my wife.”
“Liar,” Michele exclaimed, in great amusement. “Can I whisper to you how
many girlfriends I’ve had?”
He  got  up  and,  followed  by  Gigliola’s  look  of  disgust,  stood  behind  my
husband, whispered to him.
“Incredible,” Pietro exclaimed, cautiously ironic. They laughed together.
Meanwhile Elisa returned, she handed me a package wrapped in packing
paper.
“Open it.”
“Do you know what’s in it?” I asked, puzzled.
“We both know,” said Marcello, “but we hope you don’t.”
I unwrapped the package. I realized, as I did, that they were all watching me.
Lila looked at me sideways, intent, as if she expected a snake to dart out. When
they  saw  that  Antonio,  the  son  of  crazy  Melina,  the  illiterate  and  violent
servant of the Solaras, my boyfriend in adolescence, had sent me as a gift
nothing wonderful, nothing moving, nothing that alluded to times past, but
only a book, they seemed disappointed. Then they noticed that I had changed
color, that I was looking at the cover with a joy I couldn’t control. It wasn’t just
any book. It was my book. It was the German translation of my novel, six years
after its publication in Italy. For the first time I was present at the spectacle—
yes, a spectacle—of my words dancing before my eyes in a foreign language.
“You didn’t know about it?” Elisa asked, happy.
“No.”
“And you’re pleased?”
“Very pleased.”
My sister announced to everyone proudly: “It’s the novel Lenuccia wrote,
but with German words.”
And my mother, reddening in return, said: “You see how famous she is?”
Gigliola took the book, paged through it, said admiringly: the only thing I
can understand is Elena Greco. Lila then reached out her hand in an imperative
way, indicating that she wanted it. I saw in her eyes curiosity, the desire to
touch and look at and read the unknown language that contained me and had
transported me far away. I saw in her the urgency for that object, an urgency
that I recognized, she had had it as a child, and it softened me. But Gigliola
started angrily, she pulled the book away so that Lila couldn’t take it, and said:
“Wait, I have it now. What is it, you know German?” And Lila withdrew her
hand, shook her head no, and Gigliola exclaimed: “Then don’t be a pain in the
ass, let me look: I want to see what Lenuccia was able to do.” In the general
silence, she turned the book over and over in her hands with satisfaction. She
leafed through the pages one after another, slowly, as if she were reading a few
lines here, a few there. Finally, her voice thickened by the wine, she said,
handing it to me: “Bravo, Lenù, compliments for everything, the book, the
husband, the children. You might think that we’re the only ones who know you
and instead even the Germans do. What you have, you deserve, you got it with
hard work, without hurting anyone, without bullshitting with other people’s
husbands. Thank you, now I really have to go, good night.”
She struggled to get up, sighing, she had become even heavier, because of
the wine. She yelled at the children: Hurry up, and they protested, the older
said something vulgar in dialect, she slapped him and dragged him toward the
door. Michele shook his head with a smile on his face, he muttered: I’ve had a
rough time with that bitch, she always has to ruin my day. Then he said calmly:
Wait, Gigliò, what’s your hurry, first we have to eat your father’s dessert, then
we’ll go. And the children, in a flash, fortified by their father’s words, slipped
away and returned to the table. Gigliola, instead, continued with her heavy
tread toward the door, saying in irritation: I’ll go by myself, I don’t feel well.
But at that point Michele shouted at her in a loud voice, charged with violence:
Sit down right now, and she stopped as if the words had paralyzed her legs.
Elisa jumped up and said softly, Come, help me get the cake. She took her by
the arm, pulled her toward the kitchen. I reassured Dede with a look, she was
frightened by Michele’s shouting. Then I held out the book to Lila, saying: Do
you want to see? She shook her head with an expression of indifference.
94.
“Where have we ended up?” Pietro asked, half outraged and half amused,
when, once the children had been put to bed, we closed the door of the room
that Elisa had given us. He wanted to joke about the more incredible moments
of the evening, but I attacked him, we quarreled in low voices. I was angry with
him, with everyone, with myself. From the chaotic feeling I had inside, the
desire that Lila would get sick and die was re-emerging. Not out of hatred, I
loved her more and more, I wouldn’t have been capable of hating her. But I
couldn’t bear the emptiness of her evasion. How could you possibly, I asked
Pietro,  agree  to  let  them  take  our  bags,  bring  them  here,  give  them  the
authority to move us to this house? And he: I didn’t know what sort of people
they were. No, I hissed, it’s that you’ve never listened to me, I’ve always told
you where I come from.
We talked for a long time, he tried to soothe me, I berated him. I said he had
been too timid, that he had been put upon, that he knew how to insist only
with the well-brought-up people of his world, that I no longer trusted him, that
I didn’t even trust his mother, how could it be that my book had come out in
Germany two years ago and the publisher had said nothing about it, what
other countries had it been published in without my knowing, I wanted to get
to the bottom of it, et cetera et cetera. To make me feel better, he agreed, and
urged me to telephone his mother and the publisher the next morning. Then
he declared a great liking for what he called the working-class environment I
had  been  born  and  brought  up  in.  He  whispered  that  my  mother  was  a
generous and very intelligent person, he had kind words for my father, for
Elisa, for Gigliola, for Enzo. But his tone changed abruptly when he came to the
Solaras: he called them crooks, vicious scoundrels, smooth-talking criminals.
And finally he came to Lila. He said softly: It’s she who disturbed me most. I
noticed, I snapped, you talked to her the whole evening. Pietro shook his head
energetically, he explained, surprisingly, that Lila had seemed to him the worst
person. He said that she wasn’t at all my friend, that she hated me, that she was
extraordinarily intelligent, that she was very fascinating, but her intelligence
had been put to bad use—it was the evil intelligence that sows discord and
hates life—and her fascination was the more intolerable, the fascination that
enslaves and drives a person to ruin. Just like that.
At first I pretended to disagree, but in fact I was pleased. I had been wrong
then, Lila hadn’t affected him, Pietro was a man practiced in perceiving the
subtext of every text and had easily picked up her unpleasant aspects. But soon
it seemed to me that he was overdoing it. He said: I don’t understand how your
relationship could have lasted so long, obviously you’ve carefully hidden from
each  other  anything  that  could  rupture  it.  And  he  added:  either  I  haven’t
understood anything about her—and it’s likely, I don’t know her—or I haven’t
understood anything about you, and that is more upsetting. Finally he said the
ugliest words: She and that Michele are made for each other, if they aren’t
already lovers they will be. Then I revolted. I hissed that I couldn’t bear his
pedantic overeducated bourgeois tone, that he must never again speak of my
friend in that way, that he hadn’t understood anything. And as I was speaking I
seemed to perceive something that at that moment not even he knew: Lila had
affected him, seriously; Pietro had grasped her exceptionality so well that he
was frightened by it and now felt the need to vilify her. He was afraid not for
himself, I think, but for me and for our relationship. He was afraid that, even at
a distance, she would tear me away from him, destroy us. And to protect me he
overdid it, he slandered her, in a confused way he wanted me to be disgusted
by her and expel her from my life. I whispered good night, and turned the
other way.
95.
The next day I got up very early and packed the suitcases, I wanted to return
to  Florence  right  away.  But  I  couldn’t.  Marcello  said  he  had  promised  his
brother to take us to Acerra and since Pietro, although I let him know in every
possible way that I wanted to leave, was willing, we left the children with Elisa
and agreed to let that big man drive us to a long, low yellow building, a large
shoe  warehouse.  The  whole  way  I  was  silent,  while  Pietro  asked  questions
about  the  Solaras’  business  in  Germany  and  Marcello  equivocated,  with
disjointed  phrases  like:  Italy,  Germany,  the  world,  Professò,  I’m  more
Communist  than  the  Communists,  more  revolutionary  than  the
revolutionaries, for me if you could flatten everything and build it all again
from the beginning I’d be in the first row. Anyway, he added, looking at me in
the  rear-view  mirror  in  search  of  agreement,  love  for  me  comes  before
everything.
When we got there, he led us into a low-ceilinged room, illuminated by neon
lights. There was a strong odor of ink, of dust, of overheated insulators, mixed
with that of uppers and shoe polish. Look, Marcello said, here’s the contraption
Michele rented. I looked around, there was no one at the machine. The System
3 was completely unremarkable, an uninteresting piece of furniture backed up
to a wall: metal panels, control knobs, a red switch, a wooden shelf, keyboards.
I  don’t  understand  anything  about  it,  said  Marcello,  this  is  stuff  that  Lina
knows,  but  she  doesn’t  have  a  schedule,  she’s  always  in  and  out.  Pietro
carefully examined the panels, the control knobs, everything, but it was clear
that modernity was disappointing him, all the more since Marcello answered
every question with: This is my brother’s business, I have other problems on
my mind.
Lila  showed  up  when  we  were  about  to  leave.  She  was  with  two  young
women who were carrying metal containers. She seemed irritated, and ordered
them around. As soon as she noticed us she changed her tone, she became
polite but in a forced way, as if a part of her brain had broken free and were
reaching toward urgent things to do with the job. She ignored Marcello, and
addressed Pietro but as if she were also speaking to me. What do you care
about this stuff, she said, teasing, if you’re really interested in it let’s make a
deal: You work here and I’ll take up your things, novels, paintings, antiquities.
Again  I  had  the  impression  that  she  had  aged  before  me,  not  only  in  her
appearance but in her movements, her voice, her choice of a dull, vaguely
bored manner in which to explain to us not only how the System 3 and the
various machines worked but also the magnetic cards, the tapes, the five-inch
disks, and other innovations that were on the way, like desktop computers that
one could have at home for one’s personal use. She was no longer the Lila who
on the telephone talked about the new job in childish tones, and she seemed
far  removed  from  Enzo’s  enthusiasm.  She  acted  like  a  super-competent
employee on whom the boss has dumped one of the many headaches, the
tourist  visit.  She  wasn’t  friendly  toward  me,  she  never  joked  with  Pietro.
Finally she ordered the girls to show my husband how the punch-card machine
worked, then she pushed me into the hall, and said: “So? Did you congratulate
Elisa? Does one sleep well in Marcello’s house? Are you glad the old witch is
sixty?”
I replied nervously: “If my sister wants it, what can I do, beat her over the
head?”
“You see? In the fairy tales one does as one wants, and in reality one does
what one can.”
“That’s not true. Who forced you to be used by Michele?”
“I’m using him, not him me.”
“You’re deceiving yourself.”
“Wait and you’ll see.”
“What do you want me to see, Lila, forget it.”
“I repeat, I don’t like it when you act like that. You don’t know anything
about us anymore, so it’s better if you say nothing.”
“You mean I can criticize you only if I live in Naples?”
“Naples, Florence: you aren’t doing anything anywhere, Lenù.”
“Who says so?”
“The facts.”
“I know my facts, not you.”
I was tense, she realized it. She gave me a conciliatory look.
“You make me mad and I say things I don’t think. You did well to leave
Naples, you did very well. But you know who’s back?”
“Who?”
“Nino.”
The news burned my chest.
“How do you know?”
“Marisa told me. He got a professorship at the university.”
“He didn’t like Milan?”
Lila narrowed her eyes.
“He married someone from Via Tasso who is related to half the Banco di
Napoli. They have a child a year old.”
I don’t know if I suffered, certainly I had trouble believing it.
“He’s really married?”
“Yes.”
I looked at her to see what she had in mind.
“Do you intend to see him?”
“No. But if I happen to run into him, I want to tell him that Gennaro isn’t
his.”
96.
She said to me this and some other fragmented things: Congratulations, you
have an intelligent and handsome husband, he speaks as if he were religious even if he’s
not a believer, he knows ancient and modern facts, in particular he knows a lot of things
about  Naples,  I’m  ashamed,  I’m  Neapolitan  but  I  don’t  know  anything.  Gennaro  is
growing up, my mother takes care of him more than I do, he’s smart in school. With
Enzo things are good, we work a lot, we rarely see each other. Stefano has ruined himself
with his own hands: the carabinieri found stolen goods in the back of the shop, I don’t
know what, he was arrested; now he’s out but he has to be careful, he has nothing
anymore, I give him money, not the other way around. You see how things change: if I
had remained Signora Carracci I would be ruined, I would have ended up with my ass
on the ground like all the Carraccis; instead I am Raffaella Cerullo and I’m the technical
director for Michele Solara at four hundred and twenty thousand lire a month. The
result  is  that  my  mother  treats  me  like  a  queen,  my  father  has  forgiven  me  for
everything, my brother sucks money out of me, Pinuccia says she loves me so much,
their children call me Auntie. But it’s a boring job, completely the opposite of what it
seemed at first: still too slow, you waste a lot of time, let’s hope that the new machines
get  here  soon—they’re  a  lot  faster.  Or  no.  Speed  consumes  everything,  as  when
photographs come out blurry. Alfonso used that expression, he used it in fun, he said
that  he  came  out  blurry,  without  clear  outlines.  Lately  he’s  been  talking  to  me
constantly about friendship. He wants to be my friend, he would like to copy me on
copying paper, he swears that he would like to be a girl like me. What sort of girl, I said
to him, you’re a male, Alfò, you don’t know anything about what I’m like, and even if
we’re  friends  and  you  study  me  and  spy  on  me  and  copy  me,  you’ll  never  know
anything. So—he was having a good time—what do I do, I suffer being the way I am.
And he confessed to me that he has always loved Michele—yes, Michele Solara—and he
wishes Michele would like him the way he thinks Michele likes me. You understand,
Lenù, what happens to people: we have too much stuff inside and it swells us, breaks us.
All right, I said, we’re friends, but get out of your mind that you can be a woman like
me, all you’d succeed in being is what a woman is according to you men. You can copy
me, make a portrait as precise as an artist, but my shit will always remain mine, and
yours will be yours. Ah, Lenù, what happens to us all, we’re like pipes when the water
freezes, what a terrible thing a dissatisfied mind is. You remember what we did with my
wedding picture? I want to continue on that path. The day will come when I reduce
myself to diagrams, I’ll become a perforated tape and you won’t find me anymore.
Nonsense,  that’s  all.  That  talk  in  the  hall  confirmed  to  me  that  our
relationship  no  longer  had  any  intimacy.  It  had  been  reduced  to  succinct
information, scant details, mean remarks, hot air, no revelation of facts and
thoughts for me alone. Lila’s life was now hers and that was all, it seemed that
she didn’t want to share it with anyone. Pointless to persist with questions like:
What do you know about Pasquale, where did he end up, what do you have to
do with Soccavo’s death, the kneecapping of Filippo, what led you to accept
Michele’s offer, what do you make of his dependence on you. Lila had retreated
into the unconfessable, any questions of mine could not become conversation,
she  would  say:  What  are  you  thinking,  you’re  crazy,  Michele,  dependence,
Soccavo, what are you talking about? Even now, as I write, I realize that I don’t
have enough information to move on to Lila went, Lila did, Lila met, Lila planned.
And yet, as I was returning in the car to Florence, I had the impression that
there in the neighborhood, between backwardness and modernity, she had
more  history  than  I  did.  How  much  I  had  lost  by  leaving,  believing  I  was
destined for who knows what life. Lila, who had remained, had a very new job,
she earned a lot of money, she acted in absolute freedom and according to
schemes that were indecipherable. She was very attached to her son, she had
been extremely devoted to him in the first years of his life, and she still kept an
eye on him; but she seemed capable of being free of him as and when she
wanted, he didn’t cause her the anxieties my daughters caused me. She had
broken  with  her  family,  and  yet  she  took  on  their  burden  and  the
responsibility for them whenever she could. She took care of Stefano who was
in trouble, but without getting close to him. She hated the Solaras and yet she
submitted to them. She was ironic about Alfonso and was his friend. She said
she didn’t want to see Nino again, but I knew it wasn’t so, that she would see
him. Hers was a life in motion, mine was stopped. While Pietro drove in silence
and the children quarreled, I thought a lot about her and Nino, about what
might happen. Lila will take him back, I fantasized, she’ll manage to see him
again, she’ll influence him the way she knows how, she’ll get him away from
his wife and son, she’ll use him in her war I no longer know against whom,
she’ll induce him to get divorced, and meanwhile she’ll escape from Michele
after taking a lot of money from him, and she’ll leave Enzo, and finally she’ll
make up her mind to divorce Stefano, and maybe she’ll marry Nino, maybe not,
but certainly they’ll put their intelligences together and who can say what they
will become.
Become. It was a verb that had always obsessed me, but I realized it for the
first time only in that situation. I wanted to become, even though I had never
known what. And I had become, that was certain, but without an object, without
a  real  passion,  without  a  determined  ambition.  I  had  wanted  to  become
something—here  was  the  point—only  because  I  was  afraid  that  Lila  would
become someone and I would stay behind. My becoming was a becoming in her
wake. I had to start again to become, but for myself, as an adult, outside of her.
97.
I telephoned Adele as soon as I got home, to find out about the German
translation that Antonio had sent me. It had come out of the blue, she didn’t
know anything about it, either. She called the publisher. She called me back
after a while to tell me that the book had been published not only in Germany
but in France and Spain. So, I asked, what should I do? Adele answered in
bewilderment: Nothing, be satisfied. Of course, I said, I’m very pleased, but
from the practical point of view, I don’t know, should I go promote it abroad?
She  said  affectionately:  You  don’t  have  to  do  anything,  Elena,  the  book
unfortunately didn’t sell anywhere.
My mood got worse. I nagged the publisher, I asked for precise information
about the translations, I was angry because no one cared to keep me informed,
I ended up saying to an indifferent secretary: I found out about the German
edition not from you but from a semiliterate friend: can you do your job or
not? Then I apologized, I felt stupid. One after the other the French copy and
the Spanish arrived, a copy in German without the crumpled look of the one
sent by Antonio. They were ugly books: on the cover were women in black
dresses, men with drooping mustaches and a cloth cap on their head, laundry
hung out to dry. I leafed through them, I showed them to Pietro, I placed them
on a bookshelf among other novels. Mute paper, useless paper.
A time of weary discontent began. I called Elisa every day to find out if
Marcello was still kind, if they had decided to get married. She responded to
my apprehensions with carefree laughter and stories of a happy life, of trips by
car or plane, of prosperity for our brothers, of well-being for our father and
mother. Now, at times, I envied her. I was tired, irritable. Elsa was constantly
getting sick, Dede required attention, Pietro lingered over his book without
finishing it. I lost my temper for no reason. I scolded the children, I quarreled
with my husband. The result was that all three were afraid of me. The girls, if I
merely passed by their room, stopped playing and looked at me in alarm, and
Pietro increasingly preferred the university library to our house. He went out
early in the morning and came home at night. When he returned he seemed to
have on him signs of the conflicts that I, now left out of all public activity, read
about only in the newspapers: the fascists who knifed and killed, the comrades
who did no less, the police who had by law a broad mandate to shoot and did so
even here in Florence. Until what I had long been expecting happened: Pietro
found himself at the center of a nasty episode that got a lot of attention in the
papers. He failed a youth with an important surname, who was very active in
the struggles. The young man insulted him in front of everyone and aimed a
gun at him. Pietro, according to the story that an acquaintance told me, not
him—nor was it a first-hand version, she wasn’t present—calmly recorded the
failure, handed the exam book to the boy, and said more or less: Either be
serious and shoot or you’d best get rid of that weapon immediately, because in
a moment I’m going to go and report you. The boy aimed the gun at his face for
long minutes, then he put it in his pocket, took the exam book, and fled. Pietro
went to the carabinieri and the student was arrested. But it didn’t end there.
The young man’s family went not to Pietro but to his father to persuade him to
withdraw the charges. Professor Guido Airota tried to convince his son, and
there were long phone calls, in the course of which, with some amazement, I
heard the old man lose his temper, raise his voice. But Pietro wouldn’t give in.
In  great  agitation,  I  confronted  him,  I  asked:  “Do  you  realize  how  you’re
behaving?”
“What should I do?”
“Reduce the tension.”
“I don’t understand you.”
“You don’t want to understand me. You’re just like our professors in Pisa, the
most intolerable.”
“I don’t think so.”
“But you are. Have you forgotten how we struggled in vain to keep up with
stupid courses and pass exams that were even more stupid?”
“My course isn’t stupid.”
“You might ask your students.”
“One asks for an opinion from those who are competent to give it.”
“Would you ask me, if I were your student?”
“I have very good relations with the ones who study.”
“So you like the ones who suck up to you?”
“You like the ones who brag, like your friend in Naples?”
“Yes.”
“And is that why you were always the most dutiful?”
I was confused.
“Because I was poor and it seemed a miracle to have gone so far.”
“Well, that boy has nothing in common with you.”
“You don’t have anything in common with me, either.”
“What do you mean?”
I didn’t answer, I avoided it out of prudence. But then my rage increased
again, I went back to criticizing his intransigence, I said to him: You’d already
failed him, what was the point of pressing charges? He said: He committed a
crime. I: He was playing at frightening you, he’s a boy. He answered coldly:
That gun is a weapon, not a toy, and it was stolen with other weapons seven
years ago, from a carabinieri barracks in Rovezzano. I said: The boy didn’t
shoot. He muttered: The weapon was loaded, what if he had? He didn’t, I cried.
He, too, raised his voice: I should have waited for him to shoot me and then
reported him? I yelled: Don’t shout, your nerves are shattered. He answered:
Think of your own nerves. And it was pointless to explain to him, anxiously,
that even if my words and tone were argumentative, the situation actually
seemed very dangerous and I was worried. I’m afraid for you, I said, for the
children, for me. But he didn’t console me. He went to his study and tried to
work on his book. Only weeks later he told me that two plainclothes policemen
had come to see him and asked for information about certain students, had
showed him some photographs. The first time he had greeted them politely
and politely sent them away without giving them any information. The second
time he had asked: “Have these youths committed crimes?”
“No, for now no.”
“Then what do you want from me?”
He had seen them to the door with all the contemptuous courtesy he was
capable of.
98.
For months Lila never called; she must have been very busy. Nor did I seek
her out, although I felt the need. To diminish the feeling of emptiness I tried to
strengthen  my  connection  with  Mariarosa,  but  there  were  many  obstacles.
Franco now lived permanently at my sister-in-law’s house, and Pietro didn’t
like me getting too close to his sister or seeing my former boyfriend. If I stayed
in  Milan  for  more  than  a  day  his  mood  darkened,  imaginary  illnesses
multiplied, tension increased. Also, Franco himself, who in general never went
out except for the medical treatments he constantly needed, didn’t welcome
my presence; he was impatient with the children’s voices, which he found too
loud, and at times he disappeared, alarming both Mariarosa and me. My sister-
in-law, besides, had endless engagements and was permanently surrounded by
women. Her apartment was a sort of gathering place, she welcomed everyone,
intellectuals,  middleclass  women,  working-class  women  fleeing  abusive
companions, runaway girls, so that she had little time for me, and anyway she
was too much a friend to all for me to feel sure of our bond. And yet in her
house  the  desire  to  study  was  rekindled,  and  even  to  write.  Or,  rather,  it
seemed to me that I would be capable of it.
We discussed ourselves a lot. But although we were all women—Franco, if he
hadn’t  fled,  stayed  shut  in  his  room—we  struggled  to  understand  what  a
woman  was.  Our  every  move  or  thought  or  conversation  or  dream,  once
analyzed in depth, seemed not to belong to us. And this excavation seemed to
exasperate those who were weaker, who couldn’t tolerate such an excess of
self-reflection  and  believed  that  to  embark  on  the  road  of  freedom  it  was
enough simply to cut off men. These were unstable times, arcing in waves.
Many of us feared a return to the flat calm and stayed on the crest, holding on
to  extreme  formulations  and  looking  down  with  fear  and  rage.  When  we
learned that the security force of Lotta Continua had attacked a separatist
women’s demonstration, we grew bitter to the point where, if one of the more
rigid participants discovered that Mariarosa had a man in the house—which
she didn’t declare but didn’t hide, either—the discussion became fierce, the
ruptures dramatic.
I hated those moments. I was looking for inspiration, not conflict, subjects
for research, not dogmas. Or at least so I said to myself, and sometimes also to
Mariarosa, who listened to me in silence. On one of those occasions I told her
about my relationship with Franco in the days of the Normale, and what he
had meant to me. I’m grateful to him, I said, I learned so much from him, and
I’m sorry that he now treats me and the children coldly. I thought about it for a
moment, and continued: Maybe there’s something mistaken in this desire men
have to instruct us; I was young at the time, and I didn’t realize that in his wish
to transform me was the proof that he didn’t like me as I was, he wanted me to
be different, or, rather, he didn’t want just a woman, he wanted the woman he
imagined he himself would be if he were a woman. For Franco, I said, I was an
opportunity for him to expand into the feminine, to take possession of it: I
constituted the proof of his omnipotence, the demonstration that he knew
how to be not only a man in the right way but also a woman. And today when
he no longer senses me as part of himself, he feels betrayed.
I expressed myself exactly like that. And Mariarosa listened with genuine
interest, not the slightly feigned curiosity she displayed with the women in
general. Write something on that subject, she urged me. She was moved, she
said that she had been too late to know the Franco I was talking about. Then
she added: Maybe it was a good thing, I would never have been in love with
him, I hate men who are too intelligent and tell me how I should be; I prefer
this suffering and reflective man I’ve taken in and am caring for. Then she
insisted: Put it in writing, what you’ve said.
I nodded somewhat nervously, pleased with the praise but also embarrassed,
I said something about my relationship with Pietro, about how he tried to
impose  his  views  on  me.  This  time  Mariarosa  burst  out  laughing,  and  the
almost  solemn  tone  of  our  conversation  changed.  Franco  associated  with
Pietro? You’re joking, she said, Pietro has trouble keeping together his own
virility, imagine if he has the energy to impose on you his feeling for what a
woman  is.  You  want  to  know  something?  I  would  have  sworn  that  you
wouldn’t marry him. I would have sworn that, if you had, you would leave him
in a year. I would have sworn that you would be careful not to have children.
The fact that you’re still together seems to me a miracle. You’re really a good
girl, poor you.
99.
We  were  therefore  at  this  point:  my  husband’s  sister  considered  my
marriage a mistake and said it to me frankly. I didn’t know whether to laugh or
cry, it seemed to me the ultimate and unbiased confirmation of my conjugal
unease.  Besides,  what  could  I  do  about  it?  I  said  to  myself  that  maturity
consisted in accepting the turn that existence had taken without getting too
upset, following a path between daily practices and theoretical achievements,
learning to see oneself, know oneself, in expectation of great changes. Day by
day  I  grew  calmer.  My  daughter  Dede  went  to  first  grade  early,  already
knowing how to read and write; my daughter Elsa was happy to stay alone with
me all morning in the still house; my husband, although he was the dullest of
academics, seemed finally close to finishing a second book that promised to be
even more important than the first; and I was Signora Airota, Elena Airota, a
woman depressed by submissiveness who nevertheless, urged by her sister-in-
law but also in order to fight discouragement, had begun to study almost in
secret the invention of woman by men, mixing the ancient and modern worlds.
I didn’t have an objective; only to be able to say to Mariarosa, to my mother-in-
law, to this or that acquaintance: I’m working.
And so I pushed on, in my speculations, from the first and second Biblical
creations  to  Defoe-Flanders,  Flaubert-Bovary,  Tolstoy-Karenina,  La  dernière
mode,  Rose  Sélavy,  and  beyond,  and  still  further,  in  a  frenzy  of  revelation.
Slowly  I  began  to  feel  some  satisfaction.  I  discovered  everywhere  female
automatons created by men. There was nothing of ourselves, and the little
there  was  that  rose  up  in  protest  immediately  became  material  for  their
manufacturing. When Pietro was at work and Dede was at school and Elsa was
playing next to my desk and I, at last, felt alive, digging into words and among
words, I sometimes imagined what my life and Lila’s would have been if we had
both taken the test for admission to middle school and then high school, if
together we had studied to get our degree, elbow to elbow, allied, a perfect
couple, the sum of intellectual energies, of the pleasures of understanding and
the imagination. We would have written together, we would have been authors
together, we would have drawn power from each other, we would have fought
shoulder to shoulder because what was ours was inimitably ours. The solitude
of women’s minds is regrettable, I said to myself, it’s a waste to be separated
from each other, without procedures, without tradition. Then I felt as if my
thoughts  were  cut  off  in  the  middle,  absorbing  and  yet  defective,  with  an
urgent need for verification, for development, yet without conviction, without
faith in themselves. Then the wish to telephone her returned, to tell her: Listen
to what I’m thinking about, please let’s talk about it together, you remember
what you said about Alfonso? But the opportunity was gone, lost decades ago. I
had to learn to be satisfied with myself.
Then one day, just as I was preoccupied with that need, I heard the key turn
in the lock. It was Pietro, coming home for lunch after picking up Dede at
school. I closed books and notebooks as the child burst into the room, greeted
enthusiastically by Elsa. She was starving, I knew she would cry: Mamma, what
is  there  to  eat?  Instead,  even  before  throwing  down  her  book  bag,  she
exclaimed: a friend of Papa’s is coming to lunch with us. I remember the date
precisely: March 9, 1976. I pulled myself out of my bad mood, Dede grabbed me
by the hand and drew me into the hallway. Meanwhile Elsa, because of the
announced  presence  of  a  stranger,  was  keeping  prudent  hold  of  my  skirt.
Pietro said gaily: Look who I brought you.
100.
Nino no longer had the thick beard I had seen years earlier in the bookstore,
but his hair was long and disheveled. Otherwise he had remained the boy of
years ago, tall, skinny, his eyes bright, his appearance unkempt. He embraced
me, he knelt to greet the two girls, he stood up, apologizing for the intrusion. I
murmured some cool words: Come in, sit down, what on earth are you doing in
Florence? I felt as if I had hot wine in my brain, I couldn’t give concreteness to
what was happening: Nino, Nino himself, in my house. And it seemed to me
that something was no longer functioning in the organization of internal and
external. What was I imagining and what was happening, who was the shadow
and  who  the  living  body?  Meanwhile  Pietro  explained:  We  met  at  the
university, I invited him to lunch. And I smiled, I said Yes, it’s all ready, where
there’s enough for four there’s enough for five, keep me company while I set
the table. I seemed tranquil but I was extremely agitated, my face hurt with the
effort of smiling. How is it that Nino is here, and what is here, what is is? I
surprised you, Pietro said, with some apprehension, as when he was afraid of
having been wrong about something. And Nino, laughing: I told him a hundred
times to call you, I swear, but he didn’t want to. Then he explained that it was
my father-in-law who had told him to introduce himself. He had met Professor
Airota in Rome, at the Socialist Party congress, and there, one thing leading to
another, he had said that he had work to do in Florence and the professor had
mentioned Pietro, the new book his son was writing, a volume that he had just
obtained for him and that he needed urgently. Nino had offered to take it in
person and now here we were at lunch, the girls fighting for his attention, he
who was charming to both of them, obliging to Pietro, and had a few serious
words for me.
“Think,” he said to me, “I’ve come so often to this city for work, but I didn’t
know you were living here, that you had two lovely young ladies. Luckily there
was this opportunity.”
“Are you still teaching in Milan?” I asked, knowing perfectly well that he no
longer lived in Milan.
“No, I’m teaching now in Naples.”
“What subject?”
He made a grimace of displeasure.
“Geography.”
“Meaning?”
“Urban geography.”
“How in the world did you decide to go back?”
“My mother’s not well.”
“I’m sorry, what’s wrong?”
“Her heart.”
“And your brothers and sisters?”
“Fine.”
“Your father?”
“The usual. But time passes, one grows up, and recently we’ve reconciled.
Like everyone, he has his flaws and his virtues.” He turned to Pietro: “How
much trouble we’ve made for fathers and for the family. Now that it’s our turn,
how are we doing?”
“I’m doing well,” my husband said, with a touch of irony.
“I have no doubt. You married an extraordinary woman and these two little
princesses are perfect, very well brought up, very stylish. What a pretty dress,
Dede, it looks very nice on you. And Elsa, who gave you the barrette with the
stars?”
“Mamma,” said Elsa.
Slowly I calmed down. The seconds regained their orderly rhythm, I took
note of what was happening to me. Nino was sitting at the table next to me, he
ate the pasta I had prepared, carefully cut Elsa’s meat into small pieces, ate his
with a good appetite, mentioned with disgust the bribes that Lockheed had
paid  to  Tanassi  and  to  Gui,  praised  my  cooking,  discussed  with  Pietro  the
socialist option, peeled an apple in a single coil that sent Dede into ecstasies.
Meanwhile a fluid benevolence spread through the apartment that I hadn’t felt
for a long time. How nice it was that the two men agreed with one another,
liked one another. I began to clear the table in silence. Nino jumped up and
offered to do the dishes, provided the girls helped him. Sit down, he said, and I
sat, while he got Dede and Elsa busy, eager, every so often he asked where he
should put something or other, and continued to chat with Pietro.
It was really him, after so long, and he was there. I looked without wanting
to at the ring he wore on his ring finger. He never mentioned his marriage, I
thought, he spoke of his mother, his father, but not of his wife and child.
Maybe it wasn’t a marriage of love, maybe he had married for convenience,
maybe he was forced to get married. Then the flutter of hypotheses ceased.
Nino out of the blue began to tell the girls about his son, Albertino, and he did
it as if the child were a character in a fable, in tones that were comical and
tender by turns. Finally he dried his hands, took out of his wallet a picture,
showed it to Elsa, then Dede, then Pietro, who handed it to me. Albertino was
very cute. He was two and sat in his mother’s arms with a sulky expression. I
looked at the child for a few seconds, and immediately went on to examine her.
She seemed magnificent, with big eyes and long black hair, she could hardly be
more than twenty. She was smiling, her teeth were sparkling, even, her gaze
seemed to me that of someone in love. I gave him back the photograph, I said:
I’ll make coffee. I stayed alone in the kitchen, the four of them went into the
living room.
Nino  had  an  appointment  for  work,  and  with  profuse  apologies  left
immediately after coffee and a cigarette. I’m leaving tomorrow, he said, but I’ll
be back soon, next week. Pietro urged him repeatedly to let him know, he
promised he would. He said goodbye to the girls affectionately, shook hands
with Pietro, nodded to me, and disappeared. As soon as the door closed behind
him I was overwhelmed by the dreariness of the apartment. I waited for Pietro,
although he had been so at ease with Nino, to find something hateful about his
guest, he almost always did. Instead he said contentedly: Finally a person it’s
worthwhile spending time with. That remark, I don’t know why, hurt me. I
turned  on  the  television,  and  watched  it  with  the  girls  for  the  rest  of  the
afternoon.
101.
I hoped that Nino would call right away, the next day. I started every time
the phone rang. Instead, an entire week slipped by without news from him. I
felt as if I had a terrible cold. I became idle, I stopped my reading and my notes,
I got angry at myself for that senseless expectation. Then one afternoon Pietro
returned home in an especially good mood. He said that Nino had come by the
department, that they had spent some time together, that there was no way to
persuade him to come to dinner. He invited us to go out tomorrow evening, he
said, the children, too: he doesn’t want you to go to the trouble of cooking.
The  blood  began  to  flow  more  quickly,  I  felt  an  anxious  tenderness  for
Pietro. As soon as the girls went to their room I embraced him, I kissed him, I
whispered words of love. I hardly slept that night, or rather I slept with the
impression of being awake. The next day, as soon as Dede came home from
school, I put her in the bathtub with Elsa and washed them thoroughly. Then I
moved on to myself. I took a long pleasant bath, I shaved my legs, I washed my
hair and dried it carefully. I tried on every dress I owned, but I was getting
more and more nervous, nothing looked right, and I didn’t like the way my
hair had turned out. Dede and Elsa were right there, pretending to be me. They
posed in front of the mirror, they expressed dissatisfaction with clothes and
hairdos, they shuffled around in my shoes. I resigned myself to being what I
was. After I scolded Elsa too harshly for getting her dress dirty at the last
minute, we got in the car and drove to pick up Pietro and Nino, who were at
the university. I drove apprehensively, constantly reprimanding the girls, who
were singing nursery rhymes of their own invention based on shit and pee. The
closer I got to the place where we were to meet, the more I hoped that some
last-minute engagement would keep Nino from coming. Instead I saw the two
men right away, talking. Nino had enveloping gestures, as if he were inviting
his interlocutor to enter into a space designed just for him. Pietro seemed as
usual clumsy, the skin of his face flushed, he alone was laughing and in a
deferential way. Neither of the two showed particular interest in my arrival.
My husband sat in the back seat with the two girls, Nino sat beside me to
direct me to a place where the food was good and—he said, turning to Dede and
Elsa—they made delicious frittelle. He described them in detail, getting the girls
excited. A long time ago, I thought, observing him out of the corner of my eye,
we held hands as we walked, and twice he kissed me. What nice fingers. To me
he said only Here go right, then right again, then left at the intersection. Not an
admiring look, not a compliment.
At the trattoria we were greeted in a friendly but respectful way. Nino knew
the owner, the waiters. I ended up at the head of the table between the girls,
the two men sat opposite each other, and my husband began talking about the
difficulties of life in the university. I said almost nothing, attending to Dede
and Elsa, who usually at the table were very well behaved but that night kept
causing trouble, laughing, to attract Nino’s attention. I thought uneasily: Pietro
talks too much, he’s boring him, he doesn’t leave him space. I thought: We’ve
lived in this city for seven years and we have no place of our own where we
could take him in return, a restaurant where the food is good, as it is here,
where we’re recognized as soon as we enter. I liked the owner’s courtesy, he
came to our table often, and even went so far as to say to Nino: Tonight I won’t
give you that, it’s not fit for you and your guests, and he advised something
else. When the famous frittelle arrived, the girls were elated, and so was Pietro,
they fought over them. Only then Nino turned to me.
“Why  haven’t  you  had  anything  else  published?”  he  asked,  without  the
frivolity of dinner conversation, and an interest that seemed genuine.
I blushed, I said indicating the children: “I did something else.”
“That book was really good.”
“Thank you.”
“It’s not a compliment, you’ve always known how to write. You remember
the article about the religion teacher?”
“Your friends didn’t publish it.”
“There was a misunderstanding.”
“I lost faith.”
“I’m sorry. Are you writing now?”
“In my spare time.”
“A novel?”
“I don’t know what it is.”
“But the subject?”
“Men who fabricate women.”
“Nice.”
“We’ll see.”
“Get busy, I’d like to read you soon.”
And, to my surprise, he turned out to be very familiar with the works by
women I was concerned with: I had been sure that men didn’t read them. Not
only that: he cited a book by Starobinski that he had read recently, and said
there was something that might be useful to me. He knew so much; he had
been  like  that  since  he  was  a  boy,  curious  about  everything.  Now  he  was
quoting Rousseau and Bernard Shaw, I broke in, he listened attentively. And
when the children, nerve-rackingly, began tugging at me to order more frittelle,
he signaled to the owner to make us some more. Then, turning to Pietro, he
said: “You should leave your wife more time.”
“She has all day available.”
“I’m not kidding. If you don’t, you’re guilty not only on a human level but
also on a political one.”
“What’s the crime?”
“The waste of intelligence. A community that finds it natural to suffocate
with the care of home and children so many women’s intellectual energies is
its own enemy and doesn’t realize it.”
I waited in silence for Pietro to respond. My husband reacted with sarcasm.
“Elena can cultivate her intelligence when and how she likes, the essential
thing is that she not take time from me.”
“If she doesn’t take it from you, then who can she take it from?”
Pietro frowned.
“When  the  task  we  give  ourselves  has  the  urgency  of  passion,  there’s
nothing that can keep us from completing it.”
I felt wounded, I whispered with a false smile: “My husband is saying that I
have no true interest.”
Silence. Nino asked:
“And is that true?”
I answered in a rush that I didn’t know, I didn’t know anything. But while I
was speaking, with embarrassment, with rage, I realized that my eyes were
filled with tears. I lowered my gaze. That’s enough fritelle, I said to the children
in a scarcely controlled voice, and Nino came to my aid, he exclaimed: I’ll eat
just one more, Mamma also, Papa, too, and you can have two, but then that’s it.
He called over the owner and said solemnly: I’ll be back here with these two
young ladies in exactly thirty days and you’ll make us a mountain of these
exquisite fritelle, all right?
Elsa asked: “When is a month, when is thirty days?”
And I, having managed to repress my tears, stared at Nino and said: “Yes,
when is a month, when is thirty days?”
We laughed—Dede more than us adults—at Elsa’s vague idea of time. Then
Pietro  tried  to  pay,  but  he  discovered  that  Nino  had  already  done  it.  He
protested. He drove, I sat in the back between the two girls, who were half
asleep. We took Nino to the hotel and all the way I listened to their slightly
tipsy conversation. Once we were there Pietro, euphoric, said: “It doesn’t make
sense to throw away money: we have a guest room, next time you can come
and stay with us, don’t stand on ceremony.”
Nino smiled:
“Less than an hour ago we said that Elena needs time, and now you want to
burden her with my presence?”
I interrupted wearily: “It would be a pleasure for me, and also for Dede and
Elsa.”
But as soon as we were alone I said to my husband: “Before making certain
invitations you might at least consult me.”
He  started  the  car,  looked  at  me  in  the  rearview  mirror,  stammered:  “I
thought it would please you.”
102.
Oh of course it pleased me, it pleased me greatly. But I also felt as if my body
had  the  consistency  of  eggshell,  and  a  slight  pressure  on  my  arm,  on  my
forehead, on my stomach would be enough to break it and dig out all my
secrets, in particular those which were secrets even to me. I avoided counting
the days. I concentrated on the texts I was studying, but I did it as if Nino had
commissioned that work and on his return would expect first-rate results. I
wanted to tell him: I followed your advice, I kept going, here’s a draft, tell me
what you think.
It was a good expedient. The thirty days of waiting went by too quickly. I
forgot about Elisa, I never thought of Lila, I didn’t telephone Mariarosa. And I
didn’t read the newspapers or watch television. I neglected the children and
the  house.  Of  arrests  and  clashes  and  assassinations  and  wars,  in  the
permanent  agon  of  Italy  and  the  planet,  only  an  echo  reached  me;  I  was
scarcely aware of the heavy tensions of the electoral campaign. All I did was
write, with great absorption. I racked my brains over a pile of old questions,
until I had the impression that I had found, at least in writing, a definitive
order. At times I was tempted to turn to Pietro. He was much smarter than me,
he would surely save me from writing hasty or crude or stupid things. But I
didn’t  do  it,  I  hated  the  moments  when  he  intimidated  me  with  his
encyclopedic knowledge. I worked hard, I remember, especially on the first
and second Biblical creations. I put them in order, taking the first as a sort of
synthesis of the divine creative act, the second as a sort of more expansive
account.  I  made  up  a  lively  story,  without  ever  feeling  imprudent.  God—I
wrote, more or less—creates man, Ish, in his image. He creates a masculine and
a feminine version. How? First, with the dust of the earth, he forms Ish, and
blows into his nostrils the breath of life. Then he makes Isha’h, the woman,
from the already formed male material, material no longer raw but living,
which he takes from Ish’s side, and immediately closes up the flesh. The result
is that Ish can say: This thing is not, like the army of all that has been created,
other than me, but is flesh of my flesh, bone of my bones. God produced it from
me. He made me fertile with the breath of life and extracted it from my body. I
am Ish and she is Isha’h. In the word above all, in the word that names her, she
derives from me. I am in the image of the divine spirit. I carry within me his
Word. She is therefore a pure suffix applied to my verbal root, she can express
herself only within my word.
And I went on like that and lived for days and days in a state of pleasurable
intellectual overexcitement. My only pressure was to have a readable text in
time.  Every  so  often  I  was  surprised  at  myself:  I  had  the  impression  that
striving for Nino’s approval made the writing easier, freed me.
But the month passed and he didn’t appear. At first it helped me: I had more
time and managed to complete my work. Then I was alarmed, I asked Pietro. I
discovered that they often talked in the office, but that he hadn’t heard from
him for several days.
“You often talk?” I said annoyed.
“Yes.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
“What?”
“That you often talked.”
“They were calls about work.”
“Well, since you’ve become so friendly, call and see if he’ll deign to tell us
when he’s coming.”
“Is that necessary?”
“Not for you, but the effort is mine: I’m the one who has to take care of
everything and I’d like to be warned in time.”
He didn’t call him. I responded by saying to myself: All right, let’s wait, Nino
promised the girls he’d be back, I don’t think he’ll disappoint them. And it was
true. He called a week late, in the evening. I answered, he seemed embarrassed.
He  uttered  a  few  generalities,  then  he  asked:  Is  Pietro  not  there?  I  was
embarrassed in turn, I gave the phone to Pietro. They talked for a long time, I
felt with increasing uneasiness that my husband was using unfamiliar tones:
exclamations, laughter, his voice too loud. I understood only then that the
relationship with Nino reassured him, made him feel less isolated, he forgot his
troubles and worked more eagerly. I went into my study, where Dede was
reading and Elsa playing, both waiting for dinner. But even there his voice
reached me, he seemed drunk. Then he was silent, I heard his steps in the
house. He peeked in, and said gaily to his daughters: “Girls, tomorrow night
we’re going to eat frittelle with uncle Nino.”
Dede and Elsa shouted with excitement, I asked: “What’s he doing, is he
coming to stay here?”
“No,” he answered, “he’s with his wife and son, they’re at the hotel.”
103.
It took me a long time to absorb the meaning of those words. I burst out: “He
could have warned us.”
“They decided at the last minute.”
“He’s a boor.”
“Elena, what is the problem?”
So Nino had come with his wife; I was terrified by the comparison. I knew
what I was like, I knew the crude physicality of my body, but for a good part of
my life I had given it little importance. I had grown up with one pair of shoes at
a time, ugly dresses sewed by my mother, makeup only on rare occasions. In
recent years I had begun to be interested in fashion, to educate my taste under
Adele’s guidance, and now I enjoyed dressing up. But sometimes—especially
when I had dressed not only to make a good impression in general but for a
man—preparing myself (this was the word) seemed to me to have something
ridiculous about it. All that struggle, all that time spent camouflaging myself
when I could be doing something else. The colors that suited me, the ones that
didn’t, the styles that made me look thinner, those that made me fatter, the cut
that flattered me, the one that didn’t. A lengthy, costly preparation. Reducing
myself to a table set for the sexual appetite of the male, to a well-cooked dish
to make his mouth water. And then the anguish of not succeeding, of not
seeming pretty, of not managing to conceal with skill the vulgarity of the flesh
with its moods and odors and imperfections. But I had done it. I had done it
also for Nino, recently. I had wanted to show him that I was different, that I
had achieved a refinement of my own, that I was no longer the girl at Lila’s
wedding, the student at the party of Professor Galiani’s children, and not even
the inexperienced author of a single book, as I must have appeared in Milan.
But now, enough. He had brought his wife and I was angry, it seemed to me a
mean thing. I hated competing in looks with another woman, especially under
the gaze of a man, and I suffered at the thought of finding myself in the same
place with the beautiful girl I had seen in the photograph, it made me sick to
my stomach. She would size me up, study every detail with the pride of a
woman of Via Tasso taught since birth to attend to her body; then, at the end
of the evening, alone with her husband, she would criticize me with cruel
lucidity.
I hesitated for hours and finally decided that I would invent an excuse, my
husband would go alone with the children. But the next day I couldn’t resist. I
dressed, I undressed, I combed my hair, I uncombed it, I nagged Pietro. I went
to  his  room  constantly,  now  with  one  dress,  now  another,  now  with  one
hairdo, now another, and I asked him, tensely: How do I look? He gave me a
distracted glance, he said: You look nice. I answered: And if I put on the blue
dress? He agreed. But I put on the blue dress and I didn’t like it, it was tight
across the hips. I went back to him, I said, It’s too tight. Pietro replied patiently
Yes, the green one with the flowers looks better. But I didn’t want the green
one with the flowers to simply look better, I wanted it to look great, and my
earrings to look great, and my hair to look great, and my shoes to look great. In
other words I couldn’t rely on Pietro, he looked at me without seeing me. And I
felt more and more ungainly, too much bosom, too much ass, wide hips, and
that dirty-blond hair, that big nose. I had the body of my mother, a graceless
body, all I needed was for the sciatica to return and start limping. Nino’s wife,
instead, was very young, beautiful, rich, and surely knew how to be in the
world, as I would never manage to learn. So I returned a thousand times to my
first decision: I won’t go, I’ll send Pietro with the children, I’ll have him say I
don’t feel well. I did go. I put on a white shirt over a cheerful flowered skirt, the
only jewel I wore was my mother’s old bracelet, in my purse I put the text I had
written. I said who gives a damn about her, him, all of them.
104.
Because of all my hesitations we arrived late at the restaurant. The Sarratore
family was already at the table. Nino introduced his wife, Eleonora, and my
mood changed. Oh yes, she had a pretty face and beautiful black hair, just as in
the photograph. But she was shorter than I, and I wasn’t very tall. She had no
bosom, though she was plump. And she wore a bright-red dress that didn’t suit
her at all. And she was wearing too much jewelry. And from the first words she
spoke she revealed a shrill voice with the accent of a Neapolitan brought up by
canasta players in a house with a picture window on the gulf. But mainly, in
the course of the evening, she proved to be uneducated, even though she was
studying law, and inclined to speak ill of everything and everyone with the air
of one who feels she is swimming against the tide and is proud of it. Wealthy,
in other words, capricious, vulgar. Even her pleasing features were constantly
spoiled by an expression of irritation followed by a nervous laugh, ih ih ih,
which  broke  up  her  conversation,  even  the  individual  sentences.  She  was
irritated by Florence—What does it have that Naples doesn’t—by the restaurant
—terrible—by the owner—rude—by whatever Pietro said—What nonsense—by the
girls—My goodness, you talk so much, let’s have a little quiet, please—and naturally
me—You studied in Pisa, but why, literature in Naples is much better, I’ve never heard
of that novel of yours, when did it come out, eight years ago I was fourteen. She was
sweet only with her son and with Nino. Albertino was sweet, round, with a
happy  expression,  and  Eleonora  did  nothing  but  praise  him.  The  same
happened  with  her  husband:  no  one  was  better  than  he,  she  agreed  with
everything he said, and she touched him, hugged him, kissed him. What did
that girl have in common with Lila, even with Silvia? Nothing. Why then had
Nino married her?
I observed her all evening. He was nice to her, he let himself be hugged and
kissed, he smiled at her affectionately when she said rude and foolish things,
he played distractedly with the child. But he didn’t change his attitude toward
my daughters, giving them a lot of attention; he continued to talk pleasantly to
Pietro, and even spoke a few words to me. His wife—I wished to think—did not
absorb him. Eleonora was one of the many pieces of his busy life, but had no
influence on him, Nino went forward on his own path without attaching any
importance to her. And so I felt increasingly at ease, especially when he held
my wrist for a few seconds, and almost caressed it, showing that he recognized
my bracelet; especially when he kidded my husband, asking him if he had left
me a little more time for myself; especially when, right afterward, he asked if I
had made progress with my work.
“I finished a first draft,” I said.
Nino turned to Pietro seriously: “Have you read it?”
“Elena never lets me read anything.”
“It’s you who don’t want to,” I replied, but without bitterness, as if it were a
game between us.
Eleonora at that point interrupted, she didn’t want to be left out.
“What sort of thing is it?” she asked. But just as I was about to answer, her
flighty mind carried her away and she asked me blithely: “Tomorrow will you
take me to see the shops, while Nino works?”
I smiled with false cordiality and she began with a detailed list of things that
she meant to buy. Only when we left the restaurant I managed to approach
Nino and whisper: “Do you feel like looking at what I’ve written?”
He looked at me with genuine amazement: “Would you really let me read
it?”
“If it wouldn’t bore you, yes.”
I handed him my pages furtively, my heart pounding, as if I didn’t want
Pietro, Eleonora, or the children to notice.
105.
I didn’t close my eyes. In the morning I resigned myself to the date with
Eleonora; we were to meet at ten at the hotel. Don’t do the stupid thing—I
ordered myself—of asking her if her husband began to read it: Nino is busy, it
will take time; you mustn’t think about it, at least a week will go by.
But at precisely nine, when I was about to leave, the phone rang and it was
him.
“I’m sorry,” he said, “but I’m on my way to the library and I can’t telephone
until tonight. Sure I’m not bothering you?”
“Absolutely not.”
“I read it.”
“Already?”
“Yes, and it’s really excellent. You have a great capacity for research, an
admirable rigor, and astonishing imagination. But what I envy most is your
ability as a narrator. You’ve written something hard to define, I don’t know if
it’s an essay or a story. But it’s extraordinary.”
“Is that a flaw?”
“What?”
“That it’s not classifiable.”
“Of course not, that’s one of its merits.”
“You think I should publish it as it is?”
“Absolutely yes.”
“Thank you.”
“Thank  you,  now  I  have  to  go.  Be  patient  with  Eleonora,  she  seems
aggressive but it’s only timidity. Tomorrow morning we return to Naples, but
I’ll be back after the elections and if you want we can talk.”
“It would be a pleasure. Will you come and stay with us?”
“You’re sure I won’t bother you?”
“Not at all.”
“All right.”
He didn’t hang up, I heard him breathing.
“Elena.”
“Yes.”
“Lina, when we were children, dazzled us both.”
I felt an intense uneasiness.
“In what sense?”
“You ended up attributing to her capacities that are only yours.”
“And you?”
“I did worse. What I had seen in you, I then stupidly seemed to find in her.”
I was silent for several seconds. Why had he felt the need to bring up Lila,
like that, on the telephone? And what was he saying to me? Was it merely
compliments? Or was he trying to communicate to me that as a boy he would
have loved me but that on Ischia he had attributed to one what belonged to the
other?
“Come back soon,” I said.
106.
I went out with Eleonora and the three children in a state of such well-being
that even if she had stuck a knife in me I would not have felt bad. Nino’s wife,
besides, in the face of my euphoria and the many kindnesses I showed her,
stopped being hostile, praised Dede and Elsa’s good behavior, confessed that
she admired me. Her husband had told her everything about me, my studies,
my success as a writer. But I’m a little jealous, she admitted, and not because
you’re clever but because you’ve known him forever and I haven’t. She, too,
would like to have met him as a girl, and know what he was like at ten, at
fourteen, his voice before it changed, his laughter as a boy. Luckily I have
Albertino, she said, he’s just like his father.
I observed the child, but it didn’t seem to me that I saw signs of Nino, maybe
they would appear later. I look like Papa, Dede exclaimed suddenly, proudly,
and Elsa added: I’m more like my mamma. I thought of Silvia’s son, Mirko, who
had seemed identical to Nino. What pleasure I had felt holding him in my arms,
soothing his cries in Mariarosa’s house. What had I been looking for at that
time, in that child, when I was still far from the experience of motherhood?
What had I sought in Gennaro, before I knew that his father was Stefano. What
was I looking for in Albertino, now that I was the mother of Dede and Elsa, and
why did I examine him so closely? I dismissed the idea that Nino remembered
Mirko  from  time  to  time.  Nor  did  I  think  he  had  ever  demonstrated  any
interest in Gennaro. Men, dazed by pleasure, absent-mindedly sow their seed.
Overcome  by  their  orgasm,  they  fertilize  us.  They  show  up  inside  us  and
withdraw, leaving, concealed in our flesh, their ghost, like a lost object. Was
Albertino the child of will, of attention? Or did he, too, exist in the arms of this
woman-mother without Nino’s feeling that he had had anything to do with it? I
roused myself, I said to Eleonora that her son was the image of his father and
was  content  with  that  lie.  Then  I  told  her  in  detail,  with  affection,  with
tenderness, about Nino at the time of elementary school, at the time of the
contests  organized  by  Maestra  Oliviero  and  the  principal  to  see  who  was
smartest,  Nino  at  the  time  of  high  school,  about  Professor  Galiani  and  the
vacation we had had on Ischia, with other friends. I stopped there, even though
she kept childishly asking: And then?
The more we talked, the more she liked me; she became attached to me. If
we went into a shop and I liked something, tried it on but then decided against
it, I discovered on leaving that Eleonora had bought it, as a present for me. She
also wanted to buy clothes for Dede and Elsa. At the restaurant she paid. And
she paid for the taxi in which she took me home with the children, and then
had herself driven to the hotel, loaded with packages. We said goodbye, the
children and I waved until the car turned the corner. She’s another piece of my
city, I thought. Outside my field of experience. She used money as if it had no
value. I ruled out that it was Nino’s money. Her father was a lawyer, also her
grandfather,  her  mother  was  from  a  banking  family.  I  wondered  what
difference there was between their bourgeois wealth and that of the Solaras. I
thought of how many hidden turns money takes before becoming high salaries
and lavish fees. I remembered the boys from the neighborhood who were paid
by the day unloading smuggled goods, cutting trees in the parks, working at
the construction sites. I thought of Antonio, Pasquale, Enzo. Ever since they
were boys they had been scrambling for a few lire here, a few there to survive.
Engineers,  architects,  lawyers,  banks  were  another  thing,  but  their  money
came, if through a thousand filters, from the same shady business, the same
destruction, a few crumbs had even mutated into tips for my father and had
contributed to allowing me an education. What therefore was the threshold
beyond which bad money became good and vice versa? How clean was the
money that Eleonora had heedlessly spent in the heat of a Florentine day; and
the checks with which the gifts that I was taking home had been bought, how
different were they from those with which Michele paid Lila for her work? All
afternoon, the girls and I paraded in front of the mirror in the clothes we had
been given as presents. They were nice things, pretty and cheerful. There was a
pale red, forties-style dress that looked especially good on me, I would have
liked Nino to see me in it.
But the Sarratore family returned to Naples without our having a chance to
see them again. Unpredictably, time didn’t collapse; rather, it began to flow
lightly.  Nino  would  return,  that  was  certain.  And  he  would  talk  about  my
writing. To avoid unnecessary friction I put a copy of my work on Pietro’s desk.
Then I called Mariarosa with the pleasant certainty that I had worked well and
told her I had managed to put in order that tangle I had talked to her about.
She  wanted  me  to  send  it  immediately.  A  few  days  later  she  called  me
excitedly, asked if she could translate it herself into French and send it to a
friend  of  hers  in  Nanterre  who  had  a  small  publishing  house.  I  agreed
enthusiastically, but it didn’t end there. A few hours later my mother-in-law
called pretending to be offended.
“How is it that now you give what you write to Mariarosa and not to me?”
“I’m afraid it wouldn’t interest you. It’s just seventy pages, it’s not a novel, I
don’t even know what it is.”
“When you don’t know what you’ve written it means you’ve worked well.
And anyway let me decide if it interests me or not.”
I sent her a copy. I did it almost casually. The same morning Nino, around
midday, called me by surprise from the station, he had just arrived in Florence.
“I’ll be at your house in half an hour, I’ll leave my bag and go to the library.”
“You  won’t  eat  something?”  I  asked  with  naturalness.  It  seemed  to  me
normal that he—arriving after a long journey—should come to sleep at my
house, that I should prepare something for him to eat while he took a shower
in  my  bathroom,  that  we  should  have  lunch  together,  he  and  I  and  the
children, while Pietro was giving exams at the university.
107.
Nino  stayed  for  ten  days.  Nothing  of  what  happened  in  that  time  had
anything to do with the yearning for seduction I had experienced years earlier.
I didn’t joke with him; I didn’t act flirtatious; I didn’t assail him with all sorts of
favors; I didn’t play the part of the liberated woman, modeling myself on my
sister-in-law; I didn’t tenderly seek his gaze; I didn’t contrive to sit next to him
at the table or on the couch, in front of the television; I didn’t go around the
house half-dressed; I didn’t try to be alone with him; I didn’t graze his elbow
with mine, his arm with my arm or breast, his leg with my leg. I was timid,
restrained, spoke concisely, making sure only that he ate well, that the girls
didn’t bother him, that he felt comfortable. And it wasn’t a choice, I couldn’t
have behaved differently. He joked a lot with Pietro, with Dede, with Elsa, but
as soon as he spoke to me he became serious, he seemed to measure his words
as if there were not an old friendship between us. And it seemed right to me to
do the same. I was very happy to have him in the house, and yet I felt no need
for confidential tones and gestures; in fact, I liked staying on the edge and
avoiding contact between us. I felt like a drop of rain in a spiderweb, and I was
careful not to slide down.
We had a single long exchange, focused entirely on my writing. He spoke
about it immediately, upon arriving, with precision and acuteness. He had been
struck by the story of Ish and Isha’h, he questioned me, he asked: for you, the
woman, in the Biblical story, is no different from the man, is the man himself?
Yes, I said. Eve can’t, doesn’t know how, doesn’t have the material to be Eve
outside of Adam. Her evil and her good are evil and good according to Adam.
Eve  is  Adam  as  a  woman.  And  the  divine  work  was  so  successful  that  she
herself,  in  herself,  doesn’t  know  what  she  is,  she  has  pliable  features,  she
doesn’t possess her own language, she doesn’t have a spirit or a logic of her
own, she loses her shape easily. A terrible condition, Nino commented, and I
nervously looked at him out of the corner of my eye to see if he was making
fun of me. No, he wasn’t. Rather, he praised me without the slightest sarcasm,
he cited some books I didn’t know on relevant subjects, he repeated that he
considered the work ready to be published. I listened without showing any
satisfaction, I said only, at the end: Mariarosa also liked it. Then he asked about
my sister-in-law, he spoke well of her both as a scholar and for her devotion to
Franco, and went off to the library.
Otherwise he left every morning with Pietro and returned at night after him.
On very rare occasions we all went out together. Once, for example, he wanted
to take us to the movies to see a comedy chosen just for the girls. Nino sat next
to Pietro, I between my daughters. When I realized that I was laughing hard as
soon  as  he  laughed,  I  stopped  laughing  completely.  I  scolded  him  mildly
because during the intermission he wanted to buy ice cream for Dede, Elsa, and
naturally for the adults, too. For me no, I said, thank you. He joked a little, said
that the ice cream was good and I didn’t know what I was missing, he offered
me a taste, I tasted. Small things, in other words. One afternoon we took a long
walk, Dede, Elsa, he and I. We didn’t say much, Nino let the children talk. But
the walk made a deep impression, I could point out every street, the places
where  we  stopped,  every  corner.  It  was  hot,  the  city  was  crowded.  He
constantly  greeted  people,  some  called  to  him  by  his  last  name,  I  was
introduced to this person and that, with exaggerated praise. I was struck by his
notoriety.  One  man,  a  well-known  historian,  complimented  him  on  the
children, as if they were our children. Nothing else happened, apart from a
sudden, inexplicable change in the relations between him and Pietro.
108.
It all began one evening at dinner. Pietro spoke to him with admiration of a
professor from Naples, at the time quite respected, and Nino said: I would have
bet  that  you  liked  that  asshole.  My  husband  was  disoriented,  he  gave  an
uncertain smile, but Nino piled it on, making fun of him for how easily he had
let himself be deceived by appearances. The next morning after breakfast there
was another incident. I don’t remember in relation to what, Nino referred to
my old clash with the religion professor about the Holy Spirit. Pietro, who
didn’t know about that episode, wanted to know, and Nino, addressing not him
but the girls, immediately began to tell the story as if it were some grandiose
undertaking of their mother as a child.
My husband praised me, he said: You were very courageous. But then he
explained to Dede, in the tone he took when stupid things were being said on
television and he felt it his duty to explain to his daughter how matters really
stood, what had happened to the twelve apostles on the morning of Pentecost:
a noise as of wind, flames like fire, the gift of being understood by anyone, in
any language. Then he turned to me and Nino speaking with passion of the
virtues that had pervaded the disciples, and he quoted the prophet Joel, I will
spread my spirit over every flesh, adding that the Holy Spirit was an indispensable
symbol for reflecting on how the multitudes find a way of confronting each
other  and  organizing  into  a  community.  Nino  let  him  speak,  but  with  an
increasingly ironic expression. At the end he exclaimed: I bet there’s a priest
hiding  in  you.  And  to  me,  in  amusement:  Are  you  a  wife  or  a  priest’s
housekeeper? Pietro turned red, he was confused. He had always loved those
subjects, I felt that he was upset. He stammered: I’m sorry, I’m wasting your
time, let’s go to work.
Such moments increased and for no obvious reason. While relations between
Nino and me remained the same, attentive to form, courteous and distant,
between him and Pietro the dikes broke. At both breakfast and dinner, the
guest  began  to  speak  to  the  host  in  a  crescendo  of  mocking  remarks,  just
bordering  on  the  offensive,  humiliating  but  expressed  in  a  friendly  way,
offered with a smile, so that you couldn’t object without seeming petulant. I
recognized that tone; in the neighborhood the swifter party often used it to
dominate the slower one and push him wordlessly into the middle of the joke.
Mainly, Pietro appeared disoriented: he liked Nino, he appreciated him, and so
he didn’t react, he shook his head, pretending to be amused, while at times he
seemed to wonder where he had gone wrong and waited for him to return to
the old, affectionate tone. But Nino continued, implacable. He turned to me, to
the children, he exaggerated in order to receive our approval. And the girls
approved, laughing, and I, too, a little. Yet I thought: Why is he acting like this,
if Pietro gets mad their relations will be ruined. But Pietro didn’t get mad, he
simply didn’t understand, and as the days passed his old nervousness returned.
His face was tired, the strain of those years reappeared in his worried eyes and
his lined forehead. I have to do something, I thought, and as soon as possible.
But  I  did  nothing;  rather,  I  struggled  to  expel  not  the  admiration,  but  the
excitement—maybe  yes,  it  was  excitement—that  gripped  me  in  seeing,  in
hearing, how an Airota, an extremely well-educated Airota, lost ground, was
confused, responded feebly to the swift, brilliant, even cruel aggressions of
Nino Sarratore, my schoolmate, my friend, born in the neighborhood, like me.
109.
A  few  days  before  he  returned  to  Naples,  there  were  two  especially
unpleasant  episodes.  One  afternoon  Adele  telephoned;  she,  too,  was  very
pleased with my work. She told me to send the manuscript right away to the
publisher—they could make a small volume to publish simultaneously with the
publication in France or, if it couldn’t be done in time, right afterward. I spoke
of it at dinner in a tone of detachment and Nino was full of compliments, he
said to the girls: “You have an exceptional mamma.” Then he turned to Pietro:
“Have you read it?”
“I haven’t had time.”
“Better for you not to read it.”
“Why?”
“It’s not stuff for you.”
“That is?”
“It’s too intelligent.”
“What do you mean?”
“That you’re less intelligent than Elena.”
And he laughed. Pietro said nothing, Nino pressed him: “Are you offended?”
He wanted him to react, in order to humiliate him again. But Pietro got up
from the table, he said: “Excuse me, I have work to do.”
I murmured:
“Finish eating.”
He didn’t answer. We were eating in the living room, it was a big room. For a
few seconds it seemed that he wished to cross it and go to his study. Instead he
made a half turn, sat down on the couch, and turned on the television, raising
the volume. The atmosphere was intolerable. In the space of a few days it had
all become complicated. I felt very unhappy.
“Lower it a bit?” I asked him.
He answered simply:
“No.”
Nino gave a little laugh, finished eating, helped me clear. In the kitchen I
said to him: “Excuse him, Pietro works a lot and doesn’t sleep much.”
He answered with a burst of rage: “How can you stand him?”
I looked at the door in alarm, luckily the volume of the television was still
loud.
“I love him,” I answered. And since he insisted on helping me wash the
dishes I added: “Go, please, otherwise you’re in the way.”
The other episode was even uglier, but decisive. I no longer knew what I
truly wanted: now I hoped that this period would be over quickly, I wished to
return to familiar habits, watch over my little book. Yet I liked going into
Nino’s  room  in  the  morning,  tidying  up  the  mess  he  left,  making  the  bed,
thinking as I cooked that he would have dinner with us that evening. And it
distressed me that it was all about to end. At certain hours of the afternoon I
felt mad. I had the impression that the house was empty in spite of the girls, I
myself was emptied, I felt no interest in what I had written, I perceived its
superficiality,  I  lost  faith  in  the  enthusiasm  of  Mariarosa,  of  Adele,  of  the
French publisher, the Italian. I thought: As soon as he goes, nothing will make
sense.
I was in that state—life was slipping away with an unbearable sensation of
loss—when Pietro returned from the university with a grim look. We were
waiting  for  him  for  dinner,  Nino  had  been  back  for  half  an  hour  but  had
immediately  been  kidnapped  by  the  children.  I  asked  him  kindly:  “Did
something happen?”
He muttered:
“Don’t ever again bring to this house people from your home.”
I froze, I thought he was referring to Nino. And Nino, too, who had come in
trailed by Dede and Elsa, must have thought the same thing, because he looked
at him with a provocative smile, as if he expected a scene. But Pietro had
something else in mind. He said in his contemptuous tone, the tone he used
well when he was convinced that basic principles were at stake and he was
called  to  defend  them:  “Today  the  police  returned  and  they  named  some
names, they showed me some photographs.”
I breathed a sigh of relief. I knew that, after he refused to withdraw the
charges against the student who had pointed a gun at him, the visits of the
police—even  more  than  the  scorn  of  many  militant  youths  and  not  a  few
professors—weighed on him, as they treated him as an informer. I was sure
that was why he was angry and I interrupted him, bitterly: “Your fault. You
shouldn’t have acted like that, I told you. Now you’ll never get rid of them.”
Nino intervened, he asked Pietro, mockingly: “Who did you report?”
Pietro didn’t even turn to look at him. He was angry with me, it was with me
he wanted to quarrel. He said: “I did what was necessary then and I should
have done what was necessary today. But I was silent because you were in the
middle of it.”
At that point I realized that the problem was not the police but what he had
learned from them. I said: “What do I have to do with it?”
His voice changed:
“Aren’t Pasquale and Nadia your friends?”
I repeated obtusely:
“Pasquale and Nadia?”
“The  police  showed  me  photographs  of  terrorists  and  they  were  among
them.”
I didn’t react, words failed. What I had imagined was true, then; Pietro in
fact was confirming it. For a few seconds the images returned, of Pasquale
firing the gun at Gino, kneecapping Filippo, while Nadia—Nadia, not Lila—went
up the stairs, knocked on Bruno’s door, went in and shot him in the face.
Terrible. And yet at that moment Pietro’s tone seemed out of place, as if he
were using the information to make trouble for me in Nino’s eyes, to start a
discussion that I had no wish to have. In fact Nino immediately interrupted
again, continuing to make fun of him: “So are you an informer for the police?
What are you doing? Informing on comrades? Does your father know? Your
mother? Your sister?”
I said weakly: Let’s go and eat. But right afterward I said to Nino, politely
making light of it, and to get him to stop goading Pietro by bringing up his
family: Stop it, what do you mean, informer. Then I alluded vaguely to the fact
that some time ago Pasquale Peluso, maybe he remembered him, from the
neighborhood, a good kid who had ended up getting together with Nadia, he
remembered her, naturally, Professor Galiani’s daughter. And there I stopped
because Nino was already laughing. He exclaimed: Nadia, oh good Lord, Nadia,
and he turned again to Pietro, even more mockingly: only you and a couple of
idiot police could think that Nadia Galiani is part of the armed struggle, it’s
madness. Nadia, the best and nicest person I’ve ever known, what have we
come to in Italy, let’s go and eat, come on, the defense of the established order
can do without you for now. And he went to the table, calling Dede and Elsa, as
I began to serve, sure that Pietro was about to join us.
But he didn’t. I thought he had gone to wash his hands, that he was delaying
in order to calm down, and I sat in my place. I was agitated, I would have liked
a nice calm evening, a quiet ending to that shared life. But he didn’t come, the
children were already eating. Now even Nino seemed bewildered.
“Start,” I said, “it’s getting cold.”
“Only if you eat, too.”
I hesitated. Maybe I should go and see how my husband was, what he was
doing,  if  he  had  calmed  down.  But  I  didn’t  want  to,  I  was  annoyed  by  his
behavior. Why hadn’t he kept to himself that visit from the police, usually he
did with everything of his, he never told me anything. Why had he spoken like
that in Nino’s presence: Don’t ever again bring to this house people from your home.
What urgency was there to make that subject public, he could wait, he could
have an outburst later, once we were in the bedroom. He was angry with me,
that was the point. He wanted to ruin the evening for me, he didn’t care what I
did or what I wanted.
I began to eat. The four of us ate, first course, second, and even the dessert I
had made. Pietro didn’t appear. At that point I became furious. Pietro didn’t
want to eat? All right, he didn’t have to eat, evidently he wasn’t hungry. He
wanted to mind his own business? Very well, the house was big, without him
there would be no tension. Anyway, now it was clear that the problem was not
simply that two people who had once showed up at our house were suspected
of  being  part  of  an  armed  gang.  The  problem  was  that  he  didn’t  have  a
sufficiently  quick  intelligence,  that  he  didn’t  know  how  to  sustain  the
skirmishes of men, that he suffered from it and was angry with me. But what
do I care about you and your pettiness. I’ll clean up later, I said aloud, as if I
were  issuing  an  order  to  myself,  to  my  confusion.  Then  I  turned  on  the
television and sat on the sofa with Nino and the girls.
A long time passed, filled with tension. I felt that Nino was uneasy and yet
amused. I’m going to call Papa, said Dede, who, with her stomach full, was now
worried about Pietro. Go, I said. She came back almost on tiptoe, she whispered
in my ear: He went to bed, he’s sleeping. Nino heard her anyway, he said: “I’m
leaving tomorrow.”
“Did you finish your work?”
“No.”
“Stay a little longer.”
“I can’t.”
“Pietro is a good person.”
“You defend him?”
Defend him from what, from whom? I didn’t understand, I was on the point
of getting mad at him, too.
110.
The children fell asleep in front of the television, I put them to bed. When I
came back Nino wasn’t there, he had gone to his room. Depressed, I cleaned up,
washed the dishes. How foolish to ask him to stay longer, it would be better if
he left. On the other hand, how to endure the dreariness of life without him. I
would have liked him at least to leave with the promise that sooner or later he
would return. I wished that he would sleep again in my house, have breakfast
with me in the morning and eat at the same table in the evening, that he would
talk about this and that in his playful tone, that he would listen to me when I
wanted to give shape to an idea, that he would be respectful of my every
sentence, that with me he would never resort to irony, to sarcasm. Yet I had to
admit  that  if  the  situation  had  so  quickly  deteriorated,  making  our  living
together impossible, it was his fault. Pietro was attached to him. It gave him
pleasure to see him around, the friendship that had arisen was important to
him. Why had Nino felt the need to hurt him, to humiliate him, to take away
his authority? I took off my makeup, I washed, I put on my nightgown. I locked
the house door, I turned off the gas, I lowered all the blinds. I checked on the
children. I hoped that Pietro wasn’t pretending to sleep, that he wasn’t waiting
for me in order to quarrel. I looked at his night table, he had taken a sleeping
pill, he had collapsed. It made me feel tender toward him, I kissed him on the
cheek.  What  an  unpredictable  person:  extremely  intelligent  and  stupid,
sensitive and dull, courageous and cowardly, highly educated and ignorant,
well brought up and rude. A failed Airota, he had stumbled on the path. Could
Nino, so sure of himself, so determined, have gotten him going again, helped
him improve? Again I asked myself why that nascent friendship had changed
to hostility in one direction. And this time it seemed to me that I understood.
Nino  wanted  to  help  me  see  my  husband  for  what  he  really  was.  He  was
convinced that I had an idealized image that I had submitted to on both the
emotional and the intellectual level. He had wanted to reveal to me the lack of
substance behind this very young professor, the author of a thesis that had
become a highly regarded book, the scholar who had been working for a long
time on a new publication that was to secure his reputation. It was as if in
these last days he had done nothing but scold me: You live with a dull man,
you’ve had two children with a nobody. His project was to liberate me by
disparaging him, restore me to myself by demolishing him. But in doing so did
he realize that he had proposed himself, like it or not, as an alternative model
of virility?
That  question  made  me  angry.  Nino  had  been  reckless.  He  had  thrown
confusion  into  a  situation  that  for  me  constituted  the  only  possible
equilibrium. Why sow disorder without even consulting me? Who had asked
him to open my eyes, to save me? From what had he deduced that I needed it?
Did he think he could do what he wanted with my life as a couple, with my
responsibility as a mother? To what end? What did he think he was driving at?
It’s he—I said to myself—who ought to clarify his ideas. Doesn’t our friendship
interest him? The holidays are close. I’ll go to Viareggio, he said he’s going to
Capri to his in-laws’ house. Must we wait until the end of the vacations to see
each other again? And why? Now, during the summer, it would be possible to
consolidate  the  relation  between  our  families.  I  could  telephone  Eleonora,
invite her, her husband, the child to spend a few days with us in Viareggio. And
I would like to be invited, in turn, to Capri, where I’ve never been, with Dede,
Elsa,  and  Pietro.  But  if  that  doesn’t  happen,  why  not  write  each  other,
exchange ideas, titles of books, talk about our work?
I couldn’t quiet myself. Nino was wrong. If he really was attached to me, he
had to take everything back to the starting point. He had to regain the liking
and friendship of Pietro, my husband asked nothing else. Did he really think he
was doing me good by causing those tensions? No, no, I had to talk to him, tell
him it was foolish to treat Pietro that way. I got out of bed cautiously, I left the
room.  I  went  down  the  hall  barefoot,  knocked  on  Nino’s  door.  I  waited  a
moment, I went in. The room was dark.
“You’ve decided,” I heard him say.
I was startled, I didn’t ask decided what. I knew only that he was right, I had
decided. I quickly took off my nightgown, I lay down beside him in spite of the
heat.
111.
I returned to my bed around four in the morning. My husband started, he
murmured in his sleep: What’s happening? I said in a peremptory way: Sleep,
and he became quiet. I was stunned. I was happy about what had happened,
but no matter how great an effort I made I couldn’t comprehend it inside of my
situation, inside of what I was in that house, in Florence. It seemed to me that
everything between Nino and me had been sealed in the neighborhood, when
his parents were moving and Melina was throwing things out the window and
yelling, racked by suffering; or on Ischia, when we went for a walk and held
hands; or the night in Milan, after the meeting in the bookstore, when he had
defended me against the fierce critic. That for a while gave me a sense of
irresponsibility, maybe even of innocence, as if the friend of Lila, the wife of
Pietro, the mother of Dede and Elsa had nothing to do with the child-girl-
woman who loved Nino and finally had made love with him. I felt the trace of
his hands and his kisses in every part of my body. The craving for pleasure
wouldn’t be soothed, the thoughts were: the day is far off, what am I doing
here, I’ll go back to him, again.
Then I fell asleep. I opened my eyes suddenly, the room was light. What had I
done? Here, in my own house, how foolish. Now Pietro would wake up. Now
the children would wake up. I had to make breakfast. Nino would say goodbye,
he would return to Naples to his wife and child. I would become myself again.
I got up, took a long shower, dried my hair, carefully put on my makeup,
chose a nice dress, as if I were going out. Oh, of course, Nino and I had sworn in
the middle of the night that we would never lose each other, that we would
find a way to continue to love each other. But how, and when? Why should he
have  to  look  for  me  again?  Everything  that  could  happen  between  us  had
happened, the rest was only complications. Enough, I set the table carefully for
breakfast. I wanted to leave him with a beautiful image of that permanence,
the house, the customary objects, me.
Pietro appeared disheveled, in his pajamas.
“Where are you going?”
“Nowhere.”
He looked at me in bewilderment—I never dressed that carefully as soon as I
got up.
“You look nice.”
“No thanks to you.”
He went to the window, looked out, then muttered: “I was very tired, last
night.”
“Also very rude.”
“I’ll apologize to him.”
“You should apologize to me.”
“I’m sorry.”
“He’s leaving today.”
Dede appeared, barefoot. I went to get her slippers and woke Elsa, who, as
usual, her eyes still closed, covered me with kisses. What a good smell she had,
how soft she was. Yes, I said to myself, it happened. Fortunately, it could never
happen. But now I had to discipline myself. Telephone Mariarosa to find out
about France, talk to Adele, go in person to the publishers to find out what
they intend to do with my book, if they are thinking about it seriously or just
want to please my mother-in-law. Then I heard noises in the hall. It was Nino, I
was overwhelmed by the signs of his presence, he was here, for a short time
still. I disentangled myself from the child’s hug, I said: sorry, Elsa, Mamma will
be right back, and I hurried out.
Nino was coming sleepily out of his room, I pushed him into the bathroom, I
closed the door. We kissed each other, again I lost awareness of place and time.
I was amazed at how much I wanted him: I was good at hiding things from
myself. We embraced with a fury that I had never known, as if our bodies were
crashing against each other with the intention of breaking. So pleasure was
this: breaking, mixing, no longer knowing what was mine and what was his.
Even if Pietro had appeared, if the children had looked in, they would have
been unable to recognize us. I whispered in his mouth: “Stay longer.”
“I can’t.”
“Then come back, swear you’ll come back.”
“Yes.”
“And call me.”
“Yes.”
“Tell me you won’t forget me, tell me you won’t leave me, tell me you love
me.”
“I love you.”
“Say it again.”
“I love you.”
“Swear that it’s not a lie.”
“I swear.”
112.
He left an hour later, even though Pietro sullenly insisted that he stay, even
though Dede burst into tears. My husband went to wash, and reappeared soon
afterward ready to go out. Looking down he said: I didn’t tell the police that
Pasquale and Nadia were in our house; and I did it not to protect you but
because I think dissent now is being confused with crime. I didn’t understand
right away what he was talking about. Pasquale and Nadia had completely
vanished from my mind, and they had a hard time re-entering. Pietro waited
for a few seconds in silence. Maybe he wanted me to show that I agreed with
his observation, and wished to face this day of heat and exams knowing that
we were close again, that for once, at least, we thought in the same way. But I
merely gave him a distracted nod. What did I care anymore about his political
opinions, about Pasquale and Nadia, about the death of Ulrike Meinhof, the
birth  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Vietnam,  the  electoral  advances  of  the
Communist Party? The world had retreated. I felt sunk inside myself, inside my
flesh, which seemed to me not only the sole dwelling possible but also the only
material for which it was worthwhile to struggle. It was a relief when he, the
witness to order and disorder, closed the door behind him. I couldn’t bear to be
under his gaze, I feared that lips raw from kissing, the night’s weariness, the
body hypersensitive, as if burned, all would suddenly become visible.
As soon as I was alone, the certainty returned that I would never again see or
hear from Nino. And along with it was another certainty: I could no longer live
with Pietro, it seemed intolerable that we should continue to sleep in the same
bed. What to do? I’ll leave him, I thought. I’ll go away with the children. But
what  procedure  should  I  follow,  do  I  simply  leave?  I  knew  nothing  about
separations and divorces, what was the practical part, how much time did it
take to be free again. And I knew no couple who had taken that path. What
happened to the children? How did one agree about their maintenance? Could
I take the children to another city, for example Naples? And then why Naples,
why not Milan? If I leave Pietro, I said to myself, I’ll sooner or later need a job.
Times are hard, the economy is bad, and Milan is the right place, there’s the
publisher. But Dede and Elsa? Their relations with their father? Must I stay in
Florence,  then?  Never,  ever.  Better  Milan,  Pietro  could  come  and  see  his
daughters whenever he could and wanted to. Yes. And yet my head led me to
Naples. Not to the neighborhood, I would not return there. I imagined going to
live in the dazzling Naples where I had never lived, near Nino’s house, on Via
Tasso.  See  him  from  the  window  when  he  was  going  to  and  from  the
university, meet him on the street, speak to him every day. Without disturbing
him. Without causing trouble to his family, rather, intensifying my friendship
with Eleonora. That nearness would be enough. In Naples, then, not Milan.
Besides,  Milan,  if  I  were  separated  from  Pietro,  would  no  longer  be  so
hospitable. My relations with Mariarosa would cool, and also with Adele. Not
cut off, no, they were civilized people, but, still, they were Pietro’s mother and
sister, even if they didn’t have much respect for him. Not to mention Guido,
the father. No, certainly I would no longer be able to count on the Airotas in
the same way, maybe not even on the publishing house. Help could come only
from Nino. He had strong friendships everywhere, certainly he would find a
way to support me. Unless my being close made his wife nervous, made him
nervous.  For  him  I  was  a  married  woman  who  lived  in  Florence  with  her
family. Far from Naples, therefore, and not free. To break up my marriage in a
rush, run after him, go and live right near him—really. He would think me mad;
I would look like a silly woman, out of her mind, the type of woman, dependent
on a man, who horrified Mariarosa’s friends. And, above all, not suitable for
him. He had loved many women, he went from one bed to the next, he sowed
children carelessly, he considered marriage a necessary convention but one
that couldn’t keep desires in a cage. I would make myself ridiculous. I had done
without so many things in my life, I could do without Nino as well. I would go
my own way with my daughters.
But  the  telephone  rang  and  I  hurried  to  answer.  It  was  him,  in  the
background I could hear a loudspeaker, noise, confusion, it was hard to hear
the voice. He had just arrived in Naples, he was calling from the station. Only a
hello, he said, I wanted to know how you are. Fine, I said. What are you doing?
I’m about to eat with the children. Is Pietro there? No. Did you like making love
with me? Yes. A lot? Really a lot. I don’t have any more phone tokens. Go,
goodbye, thanks for calling. We’ll talk again. Whenever you like. I was pleased
with myself, with my self-control. I kept him at a proper distance, I said to
myself, to a polite phone call I responded politely. But three hours later he
called again, again from a public telephone. He was nervous. Why are you so
cold? I’m not cold. This morning you insisted that I say I loved you and I said it,
even if on principle I don’t say it to anyone, not even to my wife. I’m glad. And
do you love me? Yes. Tonight you’ll sleep with him? Who should I sleep with? I
can’t bear it. Don’t you sleep with your wife? It’s not the same thing. Why? I
don’t care about Eleonora. Then come back here. How can I? Leave her. And
then? He began to call obsessively. I loved those phone calls, especially when
we said goodbye and I had no idea when we would talk again, but then he
called back half an hour later, sometimes even ten minutes later, and began to
rave, he asked if I had made love with Pietro since we had been together, I said
no, he made me swear, I swore, I asked if he had made love to his wife, he
shouted no, I insisted that he swear, and oath followed oath, and so many
promises,  above  all  the  solemn  promise  to  stay  home,  to  be  findable.  He
wanted me to wait for his phone calls, so that if by chance I went out—I had to,
to do the shopping—he let the telephone ring and ring in the emptiness, he let
it ring until I returned and dropped the children, dropped the bags, didn’t even
close the door to the stairs, ran to answer. I found him desperate at the other
end: I thought you would never answer me again. Then he added, relieved: but
I would have telephoned forever, in your absence I would have loved the sound
of  the  telephone,  that  sound  in  the  void,  it  seemed  the  only  thing  that
remained to me. And he recalled our night in detail—do you remember this, do
you remember that—he recalled it constantly. He listed everything he wanted
to do with me, not only sex: a walk, a journey, go to the movies, a restaurant,
talk to me about the work he was doing, listen to how it was going with my
book. Then I lost control. I whispered yes yes yes, everything, everything you
want, and I cried to him: I’m about to go on vacation, in a week I’ll be at the sea
with the children and Pietro, as if it were a deportation. And he: Eleonora is
going to Capri in three days, as soon as she leaves I’ll come to Florence, even
just for an hour. Meanwhile Elsa looked at me, she asked: Mamma, who are you
talking to all the time, come and play. One day Dede said: Leave her alone, she’s
talking to her boyfriend.
113.
Nino traveled at night, he reached Florence around nine in the morning. He
called, Pietro answered, he hung up. He called again, I went to answer. He had
parked downstairs. Come down. I can’t. Come down immediately, or I’ll come
up.  We  were  leaving  in  a  few  days  for  Viareggio,  Pietro  by  now  was  on
vacation. I left the children with him, I said I had some urgent shopping to do
for the beach. I rushed to Nino.
Seeing each other was a terrible idea. We discovered that, instead of waning,
desire had flared up and made a thousand demands with brazen urgency. If at a
distance,  on  the  telephone,  words  allowed  us  to  fantasize,  constructing
glorious prospects but also imposing on us an order, containing us, frightening
us, finding ourselves together, in the tiny space of the car, careless of the
terrible  heat,  gave  concreteness  to  our  delirium,  gave  it  the  cloak  of
inevitability, made it a tile in the great subversive season under way, made it
consistent with the forms of realism of that era, those which asked for the
impossible.
“Don’t go home.”
“And the children, Pietro?”
“And us?”
Before he left again for Naples he said he didn’t know if he could tolerate not
seeing me for all of August. We were desperate as we said goodbye. I didn’t
have a telephone in the house we had rented in Viareggio, he gave me the
number of the house in Capri. He made me promise to call every day.
“If your wife answers?”
“Hang up.”
“If you’re at the beach?”
“I have to work, I’ll almost never go to the beach.”
In our fantasy, telephoning was to serve also to set a date, sometime in
August, and find a way of seeing each other at least once. He urged me to
invent an excuse and return to Florence. He would do the same with Eleonora
and would join me. We would see each other at my house, we would have
dinner  together,  we  would  sleep  together.  More  madness.  I  kissed  him,  I
caressed him, I bit him, and I tore myself away from him in a state of unhappy
happiness.  I  went  to  buy,  at  random,  towels,  a  couple  of  bathing  suits  for
Pietro, a shovel and pail for Elsa, a blue bathing suit for Dede. At the time blue
was her favorite color.
114.
We went on vacation. I paid little attention to the children, I left them with
their  father  most  of  the  time.  I  was  constantly  running  around  to  find  a
telephone, if only to tell Nino that I loved him. Eleonora answered a couple of
times, and I hung up. But her voice was enough to irritate me, I found it unjust
that she should be beside him day and night, what did she have to do with him,
with us. That annoyance helped me overcome my fear, the plan of seeing each
other in Florence seemed increasingly feasible. I said to Pietro, and it was true,
that while the Italian publisher, with all the will in the world, couldn’t bring
out my book before January, it would come out in France at the end of October.
I therefore had to clarify some urgent questions, a couple of books would be
helpful, I needed to go home.
“I’ll go get them for you,” he offered.
“Stay with the girls, you’re never with them.”
“I like to drive, you don’t.”
“Leave me alone. Can’t I have a day off? Maids get one, why not me?”
I left early in the morning in the car; the sky was streaked with white, and
through the window came a cool breeze that carried the odors of summer. I
went into the empty house with my heart pounding. I undressed, I washed, I
looked at myself in the mirror, dismayed by the white stain of stomach and
breast, I got dressed, I undressed, I dressed again until I felt pretty.
Nino arrived around three in the afternoon; I don’t know what nonsense he
had told his wife. We made love until evening. For the first time he had the
luxury of dedicating himself to my body with a devotion, an idolatry that I
wasn’t prepared for. I tried to be his equal, I wanted at all costs to seem good to
him. But when I saw him exhausted and happy, something suddenly went bad
in my mind. For me that was a unique experience, for him a repetition. He loved
women, he adored their bodies as if they were fetishes. I didn’t think so much
of the other women of his I knew about, Nadia, Silvia, Mariarosa, or his wife,
Eleonora. I thought instead of what I knew well, the crazy things he had done
for Lila, the frenzy that had brought him close to destroying himself. I recalled
how she had believed in that passion and had clung to him, to the complicated
books he read, his thoughts, his ambitions, to affirm herself and give herself
the  chance  for  change.  I  remembered  how  she  had  collapsed  when  Nino
abandoned her. Did he know how to love and induce one to love only in that
excessive way, did he not know others? Was this mad love of ours the repeat of
other  mad  loves?  Was  he  exploiting  a  prototype:  wanting  me  in  this  way,
without caring about anything, was it the same way he had wanted Lila? Didn’t
even his coming to my and Pietro’s house resemble Lila’s taking him to the
house where she and Stefano lived? Were we not doing but redoing?
I pulled back, he asked: what’s wrong? Nothing, I didn’t know what to say,
they weren’t thoughts that could be spoken. I pressed against him, I kissed him
and I tried to get out of my heart the feeling of his love for Lila. But Nino
insisted and finally I couldn’t escape, I seized a relatively recent echo—Here,
maybe this I can say to you—and asked him in a tone of feigned amusement: “Do I
have something wrong when it comes to sex, like Lina?”
His expression changed. In his eyes, in his face, a different person appeared,
a stranger who frightened me. Even before he answered I quickly whispered: “I
was joking, if you don’t want to answer forget it.”
“I don’t understand what you said.”
“I was only quoting your words.”
“I’ve never said anything like that.”
“Liar, you did in Milan, when we were going to the restaurant.”
“It’s not true, and anyway I don’t want to talk about Lina.”
“Why?”
He didn’t answer. I felt bitter, I turned away. When he touched my back with
his fingers I whispered coldly: Leave me alone. We were motionless for a while,
without speaking. Then he began to caress me again, he kissed me lightly on
the shoulder, I gave in. Yes, I admitted to myself, he’s right, I should never ask
him about Lila.
In the evening the telephone rang; it must be Pietro, with the girls. I nodded
to Nino not to breathe, I left the bed and went to answer. I prepared in my
throat an affectionate, reassuring tone, but without realizing it I kept my voice
too low, an unnatural murmur, I didn’t want Nino to hear and later make fun of
me or even get angry.
“Why are you whispering like that?” Pietro asked. “Everything all right?”
I raised my voice immediately, and now it was excessively loud. I sought
loving words, I made much of Elsa, I urged Dede not to make her father’s life
difficult and to brush her teeth before going to bed. Nino said, when I came
back to bed: “What a good wife, what a good mamma.”
I answered: “You are no less.”
I  waited  for  the  tension  to  diminish,  for  the  echo  of  the  voices  of  my
husband  and  children  to  fade.  We  took  a  shower  together.  It  was  a  new,
enjoyable experience, a pleasure to wash him and be washed. Afterward I got
ready to go out. Again I was trying to look nice for him, but this time I was
doing it in front of him and suddenly without anxiety. He watched, fascinated,
as I tried on dresses in search of the right one, as I put on my makeup, and
from time to time—even though I said, joking, don’t you dare, you’re tickling
me, you’ll ruin the makeup and I’ll have to start over, careful of the dress, it
will tear, leave me alone—he came up behind me, kissed me on the neck, put
his hands down the front and under the dress.
I made him go out alone, I told him to wait for me in the car. Although
people were on vacation and the building was half deserted, I was afraid that
someone would see us together. We went to dinner, we ate a lot, talked a lot,
drank a lot. When we got back we went to bed but didn’t sleep. He said: “In
October I’ll be in Montpellier for five days, I have a conference.”
“Have fun. You’ll go with your wife?”
“I want to go with you.”
“Impossible.”
“Why?”
“Dede is six, Elsa three. I have to think of them.”
We began to discuss our situation, for the first time we uttered words like
married, children. We went from despair to sex, from sex to despair. Finally I
whispered: “We shouldn’t see each other anymore.”
“If for you it’s possible, fine. For me it’s not.”
“Nonsense.  You’ve  known  me  for  decades  and  yet  you’ve  had  a  full  life
without me. You’ll forget about me before you know it.”
“Promise that you’ll keep calling me every day.”
“No, I won’t call you anymore.”
“If you don’t I’ll go mad.”
“I’ll go mad if I go on thinking of you.”
We  explored  with  a  sort  of  masochistic  pleasure  the  dead  end  we  felt
ourselves in, and, exasperated by the obstacles we ourselves were piling up, we
ended by quarreling. He left, anxiously, at six in the morning. I cleaned up the
house,  had  a  cry,  drove  all  the  way  to  Viareggio  hoping  never  to  arrive.
Halfway there I realized that I hadn’t taken a single book capable of justifying
that trip. I thought: better this way.
115.
When I returned I was warmly welcomed by Elsa, who said sulkily: Papa isn’t
good at playing. Dede defended Pietro, she exclaimed that her sister was small
and stupid, and ruined every game. Pietro examined me, in a bad mood.
“You didn’t sleep.”
“I slept badly.”
“Did you find the books?”
“Yes.”
“Where are they?”
“Where do you think they are? At home. I checked what I had to check and
that was it.”
“Why are you angry?”
“Because you make me angry.”
“We  called  you  again  last  night.  Elsa  wanted  to  say  good  night  but  you
weren’t there.”
“It was hot, I took a walk.”
“Alone?”
“With whom?”
“Dede says you have a boyfriend.”
“Dede has a strong bond with you and she’s dying to replace me.”
“Or she sees and hears things that I don’t see or hear.”
“What do you mean?”
“What I said.”
“Pietro, let’s try to be clear: to your many maladies do you want to add
jealousy, too?”
“I’m not jealous.”
“Let’s hope not. Because if it weren’t so I’m telling you right away: jealousy
is too much, I can’t bear it.”
In the following days clashes like that became more frequent. I kept him at
bay, I reproached him, and at the same time I despised myself. But I was also
enraged: what did he want from me, what should I do? I loved Nino, I had
always loved him: how could I tear him out of my breast, my head, my belly,
now that he wanted me, too? Ever since I was a child I had constructed for
myself a perfect self-repressive mechanism. Not one of my true desires had
ever prevailed, I had always found a way of channeling every yearning. Now
enough, I said to myself, let it all explode, me first of all.
But I wavered. For several days I didn’t call Nino, as I had sagely declared in
Florence. Then suddenly I started calling three or four times a day, heedless. I
didn’t even care about Dede, standing a few steps from the phone booth. I
talked to him in the unbearable heat of that sun-struck cage, and occasionally,
soaked with sweat, exasperated by my daughter’s spying look, I opened the
glass door and shouted: What are you doing standing there like that, I told you
to look after your sister. At the center of my thoughts now was the conference
in Montpellier. Nino harassed me; he made it into a sort of definitive proof of
the  genuineness  of  my  feelings,  so  that  we  went  from  violent  quarrels  to
declarations of how indispensable we were to each other, from long, costly
complaints to the urgent spilling of our desire into a river of incandescent
words. One afternoon, exhausted, as Dede and Elsa, outside the phone booth,
were chanting, Mamma, hurry up, we’re getting bored, I said to him: “There’s
only one way I could go with you to Montpellier.”
“What.”
“Tell Pietro everything.”
There was a long silence.
“You’re really ready to do that?”
“Yes, but on one condition: you tell Eleonora everything.”
Another long silence. Nino murmured: “You want me to hurt Eleonora and
the child?”
“Yes. Won’t I be hurting Pietro and my daughters? To decide means to do
harm.”
“Albertino is very small.”
“So is Elsa. And for Dede it will be intolerable.”
“Let’s do it after Montpellier.”
“Nino, don’t play with me.”
“I’m not playing.”
“Then if you’re not playing behave accordingly: you speak to your wife and
I’ll speak to my husband. Now. Tonight.”
“Give me some time, it’s not easy.”
“For me it is?”
He  hesitated,  tried  to  explain.  He  said  that  Eleonora  was  a  very  fragile
woman. He said she had organized her life around him and the child. He said
that as a girl she had twice tried to kill herself. But he didn’t stop there, I felt
that he was forcing himself to the most absolute honesty. Step by step, with
the lucidity that was customary with him, he reached the point of admitting
that breaking up his marriage meant not only hurting his wife and child but
also  saying  goodbye  to  many  comforts—only  living  comfortably  makes  life  in
Naples acceptable—and to a network of relationships that guaranteed he could
do what he wanted at the university. Then, overwhelmed by his own decision
to be silent about nothing, he concluded: Remember that your father-in-law
has great respect for me and that to make our relationship public would cause
both for me and for you an irremediable breach with the Airotas. It was this
last point of his, I don’t know why, that hurt me.
“All right,” I said, “let’s end it here.”
“Wait.”
“I’ve already waited too long, I should have made up my mind earlier.”
“What do you want to do?”
“Understand that my marriage no longer makes sense and go my way.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“And you’ll come to Montpellier?”
“I said my way, not yours. Between you and me it’s over.”
116.
I  hung  up  in  tears  and  left  the  phone  booth.  Elsa  asked:  Did  you  hurt
yourself, Mamma? I answered: I’m fine, it’s Grandma who doesn’t feel well. I
went on sobbing under the worried gaze of Dede and Elsa.
During the final part of the vacation I did nothing but weep. I said I was
tired, it was too hot, I had a headache, and I sent Pietro and the children to the
beach. I stayed in bed, soaking the pillow with tears. I hated that excessive
fragility, I hadn’t been like that even as a child. Both Lila and I had trained
ourselves never to cry, and if we did it was in exceptional moments, and for a
short time: the shame was tremendous, we stifled our sobs. Now, instead, as in
Ariosto’s Orlando, in my head a fountain had opened and it flowed from my
eyes without ever drying up; it seemed to me that even when Pietro, Dede, Elsa
were about to return and with an effort I repressed the tears and hurried to
wash my face under the tap, the fountain continued to drip, waiting for the
right moment to return to the egress of my eyes. Nino didn’t really want me,
Nino pretended a lot and loved little. He had wanted to fuck me—yes, fuck me,
as he had done with who knows how many others—but to have me, have me
forever by breaking the ties with his wife, well, that was not in his plans.
Probably he was still in love with Lila. Probably in the course of his life he
would love only her, like so many who had known her. And as a result he
would remain with Eleonora forever. Love for Lila was the guarantee that no
woman—no matter how much he wanted her, in his passionate way—would
ever put that fragile marriage in trouble, I least of all. That was how things
stood. Sometimes I got up in the middle of lunch or dinner and went to cry in
the bathroom.
Pietro treated me cautiously, sensing that I might explode at any moment.
At first, a few hours after the break with Nino, I had thought of telling him
everything, as if he were not only a husband to whom I had to explain myself
but also a confessor. I felt the need of it; and especially when he approached
me in bed and I put him off, whispering: No, the children will wake up, I was on
the point of pouring out to him every detail. But I always managed to stop
myself in time, it wasn’t necessary to tell him about Nino. Now that I no longer
called the person I loved, now that I felt truly lost, it seemed to me useless to
be cruel to Pietro. It was better to close the subject with a few clear words: I
can’t live with you anymore. And yet I was unable to do even that. Just when,
in the shadowy light of the bedroom, I felt ready to take that step, I pitied him,
I feared for the future of the children, I caressed his shoulder, his cheek, I
whispered: Sleep.
On the last day of the vacation, things changed. It was almost midnight,
Dede and Elsa were sleeping. For at least ten days I hadn’t called Nino. I had
packed the bags, I was worn out by sadness, by effort, by the heat, and I was
sitting with Pietro on the balcony, each in our own lounge chair, in silence.
There humidity was debilitating, soaking our hair and clothes, and our smell of
the sea and of resin. Pietro suddenly said: “How’s your mother?”
“My mother?”
“Fine.”
“Dede told me she’s ill.”
“She recovered.”
“I called her this afternoon. Your mother has always been in good health.”
I said nothing.
How inopportune that man was. Here, already, the tears were returning. Oh
good God, I was fed up, fed up. I heard him say calmly: “You think I’m blind and
deaf. You think I didn’t realize it when you flirted with those imbeciles who
came to the house before Elsa was born.”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“You know perfectly well.”
“No, I don’t know. Who are you talking about? People who came to dinner a
few times years ago? And I flirted with them? Are you crazy?”
Pietro shook his head, smiling to himself. He waited a few seconds, then he
asked me, staring at the railing: “You didn’t even flirt with the one who played
the drums?”
I was alarmed. He wasn’t retreating, he wasn’t giving in. I snorted.
“Mario?”
“See, you remember?”
“Of course I remember, why shouldn’t I? He’s one of the few interesting
people you brought home in seven years of marriage.”
“Did you find him interesting?”
“Yes, and so what? What’s got into you tonight?”
“I want to know. Can’t I know?”
“What do you want to know? All that I know, you do, too. It must be at least
four  years  since  we  saw  that  man,  and  you  come  out  now  with  this
foolishness?”
He stopped staring at the railing, he turned to look at me, serious.
“Then let’s talk about more recent events. What is there between you and
Nino?”
117.
It was a blow as violent as it was unexpected. He wanted to know what there
was between Nino and me. That question, that name were enough to make the
fountain flow again in my head. I was blinded by tears, I shouted at him, beside
myself, forgetting we were outside, that people tired out by a day of sun and
sea were sleeping: Why did you ask that question, you should have kept it to
yourself, now you’ve spoiled everything and there’s nothing to do, it would
have been enough for you to keep silent, instead you couldn’t, and now I have
to go, now I have no choice but to go.
I don’t know what happened to him. Maybe he was convinced he had made a
mistake that now, for obscure reasons, risked ruining our relationship forever.
Or he saw me suddenly as a crude organism that cracked the fragile surface of
discourse and appeared in a pre-logical way, a woman in her most alarming
manifestation. Certainly I must have seemed to him an intolerable spectacle:
he jumped up, and went inside. But I ran after him and continued shouting all
manner of things: my love for Nino since I was a child, the new possibilities of
life  that  he  revealed  to  me,  the  unused  energy  I  felt  inside  me,  and  the
dreariness in which he, Pietro, had plunged me for years, his responsibility for
having kept me from living fully.
When I had exhausted my strength and collapsed in a corner, I found him in
front of me with hollow cheeks, his eyes sunk into violet stains, his tan a crust
of mud. I understood only then that I had shocked him. The questions he had
asked didn’t admit even hypothetical affirmative answers like: Yes, I flirted
with the drummer and even more; Yes, Nino and I have been lovers. Pietro had
formulated them only to be denied, to silence the doubts that had come to him,
to go to bed more serene. Instead I had imprisoned him in a nightmare from
which, now, he no longer knew how to escape. He asked, almost whispering, in
search of safety:
“Have you made love?”
Again I felt pity for him. If I had answered affirmatively I would have started
shouting again, I would have said: Yes, once while you were sleeping, a second
time in his car, a third in our bed in Florence. And I would have uttered those
sentences with the pleasure that that list provoked in me. Instead I shook my
head no.
118.
We returned to Florence. We reduced the communication between us to
what was indispensable and to friendly tones in the presence of the children.
Pietro went to sleep in his study as he had in the time when Dede never closed
her eyes, I in the bedroom. I thought and thought about what to do. The way
Lila  and  Stefano’s  marriage  had  ended  didn’t  constitute  a  model,  it  was
something from other times, managed without the law. I counted on a civil
procedure, according to the law, suited to the times and to our situation. But in
fact I continued not to know what to do and so I did nothing. Especially since I
had just returned and already Mariarosa was telephoning me to tell me that
the French volume was progressing, she would send me the proofs, while the
serious, punctilious editor at the Italian publishing house was raising various
questions about the text. For a while I was pleased I tried to become interested
again in my work. But I couldn’t, it seemed to me that I had problems much
more  serious  than  a  passage  interpreted  incorrectly,  or  some  awkward
sentences.
Then, one morning, the telephone rang, Pietro answered. He said hello, he
repeated hello, he hung up. My heart began to beat madly, I got ready to rush
to the phone ahead of my husband. It didn’t ring again. Hours passed, I tried to
distract myself by rereading my book. It was a terrible idea: it seemed to me
utter nonsense, and made me so weary that I fell asleep with my head on the
desk. But then the phone rang again, my husband answered again. He shouted,
frightening Dede: Hello, and slammed down the receiver as if he wanted to
break it.
It  was  Nino,  I  knew  it,  Pietro  knew  it.  The  date  of  the  conference  was
approaching, surely he wanted to insist again that I come with him. He would
aim at pulling me inside the materiality of desires. He would show me that our
only chance was a secret relationship lived to exhaustion, amid evil actions
and pleasures. The way was to betray, invent lies, leave together. I would fly in
a plane for the first time, I would be next to him as it took off, as in films. And
why not, after Montpellier we would go to Nanterre, we would see Mariarosa’s
friend, I would talk to her about my book, I would agree on initiatives, I would
introduce them to Nino. Ah yes, to be accompanied by a man I loved, who had a
power, a force that no one failed to notice. The hostile feeling softened. I was
tempted.
The next day Pietro went to the university, I waited for Nino to telephone.
He didn’t, and so, in an unreasonable outburst, I called him. I waited many
seconds, I was very agitated, in my mind there was nothing but the urgent
need to hear his voice. Afterward, I didn’t know. Maybe I would attack him, I
would start crying again. Or I would shout: All right, I’ll come with you, I will
be your lover, I will be until you’re tired of me. At that moment, however, I
only needed him to answer.
Eleonora answered. I snatched back my voice in time before it addressed the
ghost of Nino, running breathlessly down the telephone line with who knows
what compromising words. I subdued it to a cheerful tone: Hello, it’s Elena
Greco, are you well, how was the vacation, and Albertino? She let me speak in
silence, then she screamed: You’re Elena Greco, eh, the whore, the hypocritical
whore, leave my husband alone and don’t dare telephone ever again, because I
know where you live and as God is my witness I’ll come there and smash your
face. After which she hung up.
119.
I don’t know how long I stayed beside the phone. I was filled with hatred, my
head was spinning with phrases like: Yes, come, come right now, bitch, it’s just
what I’d expect, where the fuck are you from, Via Tasso, Via Filangieri, Via
Crispi, the Santarella, and you’re angry with me, you piece of garbage, you
stinking nonentity, you don’t know who you’re dealing with, you are nothing.
Another me wanted to rise up from the depths, where she had been buried
under  a  crust  of  meekness;  she  struggled  in  my  breast,  mixing  Italian  and
words from childhood, I was a turmoil. If Eleonora dared to show up at my door
I would spit in her face, throw her down the stairs, drag her out to the street by
the hair, shatter that head full of shit on the sidewalk. I had evil in my heart,
my temples were pounding. Some work was being done outside our building,
and from the window came the heat and the jangle of drilling and the dust and
the irritating noise of some machine or other. Dede was quarreling with Elsa in
the  other  room:  You  mustn’t  do  everything  I  do,  you’re  a  monkey,  only
monkeys act like that. Slowly I understood. Nino had decided to speak to his
wife  and  that  was  why  she  had  attacked  me.  I  went  from  rage  to  an
uncontainable joy. Nino wanted me so much that he had told his wife about us.
He  had  ruined  his  marriage,  he  had  given  it  up  in  full  awareness  of  the
advantages that came from it, he had upset his whole life, choosing to make
Eleonora and Albertino suffer rather than me. So it was true, he loved me. I
sighed with contentment. The telephone rang again, I answered right away.
Now it was Nino, his voice. He seemed calm. He said that his marriage was
over, he was free. He asked me: “Did you talk to Pietro?”
“I started to.”
“You haven’t told him yet?”
“Yes and no.”
“You want to back out?”
“No.”
“Then hurry up, we have to go.”
He had already assumed that I would go with him. We would meet in Rome,
it was all arranged, hotel, tickets.
“I have the problem of the children,” I said, but softly, without conviction.
“Send them to your mother.”
“Don’t even say that.”
“Then take them with you.”
“Are you serious?”
“Yes.”
“You would take me with you anyway, even with my daughters?”
“Of course.”
“You really love me,” I whispered.
“Yes.”
120.
I discovered that I was suddenly invulnerable and invincible, as in a past
stage of my life, when it had seemed to me that I could do anything. I had been
born lucky. Even when fate seemed adverse, it was working for me. Of course, I
had  some  good  qualities.  I  was  orderly,  I  had  a  good  memory,  I  worked
stubbornly, I had learned to use the tools perfected by men, I knew how to give
logical consistency to any jumble of fragments, I knew how to please. But luck
counted more than anything, and I was proud of feeling it next to me like a
trusted friend. To have it again on my side reassured me. I had married a
respectable man, not a person like Stefano Carracci or, worse, Michele Solara. I
would fight with him, he would suffer, but in the end we would come to an
agreement.  Certainly  breaking  up  the  marriage,  the  family,  would  be
traumatic. And since for different reasons we had no wish to tell our relatives,
and would in fact keep it hidden as long as possible, we couldn’t even count, at
first, on Pietro’s family, which in every situation knew what to do and whom to
turn to in handling complex situations. But I felt at peace, finally. We were two
reasonable adults, we would confront each other, we would discuss, we would
explain ourselves. In the chaos of those hours one single thing, now, appeared
irrevocable: I would go to Montpellier.
I talked to my husband that evening, I confessed to him that Nino was my
lover. He did everything possible not to believe it. When I convinced him that
it was the truth, he wept, he entreated, he got angry, he lifted up the glass top
of the coffee table and hurled it against the wall under the terrified gaze of the
children, who had been awakened by the shouts and stood in disbelief in the
living room doorway. I put Dede and Elsa back to bed, I soothed them, I waited
for them to go to sleep. Then I returned to confront my husband: every minute
became a wound. Meanwhile, Eleonora began to batter us with phone calls, day
and night, insulting me, insulting Pietro because he didn’t know how to act like
a man, telling me that her relatives would find a way of leaving us and our
daughters with nothing, not even eyes to cry with.
But I didn’t get discouraged. I was in a state of such exaltation that I couldn’t
feel that I was wrong. In fact, it seemed to me that even the pain I caused, the
humiliation and attacks I endured, were working in my favor. That unbearable
experience not only would help me to become something I would be satisfied
with but in the end, by inscrutable means, would also be useful to those who
now were suffering. Eleonora would understand that with love there is nothing
to be done, that it’s senseless to say to a person who wants to go away: No, you
must stay. And Pietro, who surely in theory already knew that precept, would
only need time to assimilate it and change it to wisdom, to the practice of
tolerance.
Only with the children did I feel that everything was difficult. My husband
insisted that we tell them the reason we were quarreling. I was against it:
They’re  small,  I  said,  what  can  they  understand.  But  at  a  certain  point  he
reproached me: If you have decided to go, you have to give your daughters an
explanation, and if you don’t have the courage then stay, it means you yourself
don’t believe in what you want to do. I said: Let’s talk to a lawyer. He answered:
There’s time for lawyers. And treacherously he summoned Dede and Elsa, who
as soon as they heard us shouting would shut themselves in their room, in a
close alliance.
“Your  mother  has  something  to  tell  you,”  Pietro  began,  “sit  down  and
listen.”
The two girls sat quietly on the sofa and waited. I started:
“Your father and I love each other, but we no longer get along and we have
decided to separate.”
“That’s  not  true,”  Pietro  interrupted  calmly,  “it’s  your  mother  who  has
decided to leave. And it’s not true, either, that we love each other: she doesn’t
love me anymore.”
I became agitated:
“Girls,  it’s  not  so  simple.  People  can  continue  to  love  one  another  even
though they no longer live together.”
He interrupted again.
“That’s also not true: either we love each other, and then we live together
and are a family; or we don’t love each other, and so we leave each other and
are  no  longer  a  family.  If  you  tell  lies,  what  can  they  understand?  Please,
explain truthfully, clearly why we are leaving each other.”
I said:
“I am not leaving you, you are the most important thing I have, I couldn’t
live without you. I only have problems with your father.”
“What?” he pressed me. “Explain what those problems are.”
I sighed, I said softly:
“I love someone else and I wish to live with him.”
Elsa glanced at Dede to understand how she should react to that news, and
since Dede remained impassive, she, too, remained impassive. But my husband
lost his composure, he shouted:
“The name, say what this other person is called. You don’t want to? Are you
ashamed? I’ll say it: you know that other person, it’s Nino, you remember him?
Your mother wants to go and live with him.”
Then he began to cry desperately, while Elsa, alarmed, whispered: Will you
take me with you, Mamma? But she didn’t wait for my response. When her
sister got up and almost ran out of the room, she immediately followed her.
That night Dede cried out in her sleep, I woke with a jolt, hurried to her. She
was sleeping, but she had wet her bed. I had to wake her, change her, change
the sheets. When I put her back to bed, she whispered that she wanted to come
to mine. I agreed, I held her next to me. Every so often she started in her sleep,
and made certain I was there.
121.
Now  the  date  of  the  departure  was  approaching,  but  things  with  Pietro
didn’t improve, any agreement, even just for that trip to Montpellier, seemed
impossible. If you go, he said, I’ll never let you see the children again. Or: If you
take the children I’ll kill myself. Or: I’ll report you for abandonment of the
conjugal home. Or: let’s the four of us go on a trip, let’s go to Vienna. Or:
Children, your mother prefers Signor Nino Sarratore to you.
I began to weaken. I recalled the resistance that Antonio had put up when I
left him. But Antonio was a boy, he had inherited Melina’s unstable mind, and
he  had  not  had  an  upbringing  like  Pietro’s:  he  hadn’t  been  trained  since
childhood to distinguish rules in chaos. Maybe, I thought, I’ve given too much
weight to the cultivated use of reason, to good reading, to well controlled
language, to political affiliation; maybe, in the face of abandonment, we are all
the same; maybe not even a very orderly mind can endure the discovery of not
being loved. My husband—there was nothing to be done—was convinced that
he had to protect me at all costs from the poisonous bite of my desires, and so,
to remain my husband, he was ready to resort to any means, even the most
abject. He who had wanted a civil marriage, he who had always been in favor of
divorce, demanded because of an uncontrolled internal movement that our
bond should endure eternally, as if we had been married before God. And since
I insisted on wanting to put an end to our relationship, first he tried all the
paths of persuasion, then he broke things, he slapped himself, suddenly he
began to sing.
When he overdid it like that he made me angry. I insulted him. And he, as
usual, changed suddenly, like a frightened beast, sat beside me, apologized,
said he wasn’t upset with me, it was his mind that wasn’t functioning. Adele—
he revealed one night amid tears—had always betrayed his father, it was a
discovery he had made as a child. At six he had seen her kiss an enormous man,
dressed in blue, in the big living room in Genoa that looked out on the sea. He
remembered all the details: the man had a large mustache that was like a dark
blade; his pants showed a bright stain that seemed like a hundred-lire coin; his
mother, against that man, seemed a bow so tensed that it was in danger of
breaking. I listened in silence, I tried to console him: Be calm, those are false
memories, you know it, I don’t have to tell you. But he insisted: Adele wore a
pink sundress, one strap had slid off her tan shoulder; her long nails seemed
like glass; she had a black braid that hung down her back like a snake. He said,
finally, moving from suffering to anger: Do you understand what you’ve done
to me, do you understand the horror you’ve plunged me into? And I thought:
Dede, too, will remember, Dede, too, will cry out something similar, as an adult.
But then I pulled away, I convinced myself that Pietro was telling me about his
mother only now, after so many years, deliberately to lead me to that thought
and wound me and hold me back.
I kept going, exhausted, day and night; I no longer slept. If my husband
tormented me, Nino in his way did no less. When he heard me worn out by
tension and worries, instead of consoling me he became irritable, he said: You
think it’s easier for me, but it’s an inferno here, just as much as for you, I’m
afraid for Eleonora, I’m afraid for what she could do, so don’t think that I’m not
in as much trouble as you, maybe even worse. And he exclaimed: But you and I
together are stronger than anyone else, our union is an inevitable necessity, is
that clear, tell me, I want to hear it, is it clear. It was clear to me. But those
words weren’t much help. I drew all my strength, rather, from imagining the
moment when I would finally see him again and we would fly to France. I had
to hold out until then, I said to myself, afterward we’ll see. For now I aspired
only to a suspension of the torture, I couldn’t stand it anymore. I said to Pietro,
at the end of a violent quarrel in front of Dede and Elsa:
“That’s enough. I’m leaving for five days, just five days, then I’ll return and
we’ll see what to do. All right?”
He turned to the children:
“Your mother says she will be absent for five days, but do you believe it?”
Dede shook her head no, and so did Elsa.
“They don’t believe you, either,” Pietro said then. “We all know that you will
leave us and never return.”
And meanwhile, as if by an agreed-on signal, both Dede and Elsa hurled
themselves at me, throwing their arms around my legs, begging me not to
leave, to stay with them. I couldn’t bear it. I knelt down, I held them around
the waist, I said: All right, I won’t go, you are my children, I’ll stay with you.
Those words calmed them, slowly Pietro, too, calmed down. I went to my room.
Oh God, how out of order everything was: they, I, the world around us: a
truce was possible only by telling lies. It was only a couple of days until the
departure. I wrote first a long letter to Pietro, then a short one to Dede with
instructions to read it to Elsa. I packed a suitcase, I put it in the guest room,
under the bed. I bought all sorts of things, I loaded the refrigerator. I prepared
for lunch and dinner the dishes that Pietro loved, and he ate gratefully. The
children, relieved, began again to fight about everything.
122.
Nino,  meanwhile,  now  that  the  day  of  departure  was  approaching,  had
stopped calling. I tried to call him, hoping that Eleonora wouldn’t answer. The
maid  answered  and  at  the  moment  I  felt  relieved,  I  asked  for  Professor
Sarratore. The answer was sharp and hostile: I’ll give you the signora. I hung
up, I waited. I hoped that the telephone call would become an occasion for a
fight between husband and wife and Nino would find out that I was looking for
him. Minutes later the phone rang. I rushed to answer, I was sure it was him.
Instead it was Lila.
We hadn’t talked for a long time and I didn’t feel like talking to her. Her
voice annoyed me. In that phase even just her name, as soon as it passed
through my mind, serpentlike, confused me, sapped my strength. And then it
wasn’t a good moment to talk: if Nino had telephoned he would find the line
busy and communication was already very difficult.
“Can I call you back?” I asked.
“Are you busy?”
“A little.”
She ignored my request. As usual it seemed to her that she could enter and
leave my life without any worries, as if we were still a single thing and there
was no need to ask how are you, how are things, am I disturbing you. She said
in a weary tone that she had just heard some terrible news: the mother of the
Solaras had been murdered. She spoke slowly, attentive to every word, and I
listened without interrupting. And the words drew behind them, as if in a
procession, the loan shark all dressed up, sitting at the newlyweds’ table at Lila
and Stefano’s wedding, the haunted woman who had opened the door when I
was looking for Michele, the shadow woman of our childhood who had stabbed
Don Achille, the old woman who had a fake flower in her hair and fanned
herself with a blue fan as she said, bewildered: I’m hot, aren’t you, too? But I
felt no emotion, even when Lila mentioned the rumors that had reached her
and she listed them in her efficient way. They had killed Manuela by slitting
her throat with a knife; or she had been shot five times with a pistol, four in
the chest and once in the neck; or they had beaten and kicked her, dragging
her through the apartment; or the killers—she called them that—hadn’t even
entered the house, they had shot her as soon as she opened the door, Manuela
had  fallen  face  down  on  the  landing  and  her  husband,  who  was  watching
television, hadn’t even realized it. What is certain—Lila said—is that the Solaras
have gone crazy, they are competing with the police to find the killer, they’ve
called  people  from  Naples  and  outside,  all  their  activities  have  stopped,  I
myself today am not working, and it’s frightening here, you can’t even breathe.
How  intensely  she  was  able  to  give  importance  and  depth  to  what  was
happening  to  her  and  around  her:  the  murdered  loan  shark,  the  children
undone, their henchmen ready to spill more blood, and her watchful person
amid the surging tide of events. Finally she came to the real reason for her
phone call:
“Tomorrow I’m sending you Gennaro. I know I’m taking advantage, you have
your daughters, your things, but here, now, I can’t and don’t want to keep him.
He’ll miss a little school, too bad. He’s attached to you, he’s fine with you,
you’re the only person I trust.”
I thought for a few seconds about that last phrase: You’re the only person I
trust. I felt like smiling, she still didn’t know that I had become untrustworthy.
So that, faced with her request, which took for granted the immobility of my
existence amid the most serene reasonableness, which seemed to assign to me
the  life  of  a  red  berry  on  the  leafy  branch  of  butcher’s  broom,  I  had  no
hesitation, I said to her:
“I’m about to go, I’m leaving my husband.”
“I don’t understand.”
“My marriage is over, Lila. I saw Nino again and we discovered that we have
always loved each other, ever since we were young, without realizing it. So I’m
leaving, I’m starting a new life.”
There was a long silence, then she asked me:
“Are you kidding?”
“No.”
It must have seemed impossible to her that I was inserting disorder into my
house, my well-organized mind, and now she was pressing me by mechanically
grasping  at  my  husband.  Pietro,  she  said,  is  an  extraordinary  man,  good,
extremely  intelligent,  you’re  crazy  to  leave  him,  think  of  the  harm  you’re
doing to your children. She talked, making no mention of Nino, as if that name
had stopped in her eardrum without reaching her brain. It must have been I
who uttered it again, saying: No, Lila, I can’t live with Pietro anymore because I
can’t do without Nino, whatever happens I’ll go with him; and other phrases
like that, displayed as if they were badges of honor. Then she began to shout:
“You’re throwing away everything you are for Nino? You’re ruining your
family for him? You know what will happen to you? He’ll use you, he’ll suck
your blood, he’ll take away your will to live and abandon you. Why did you
study so much? What fucking use has it been for me to imagine that you would
enjoy a wonderful life for me, too? I was wrong, you’re a fool.”
123.
I put down the receiver as if it were burning hot. She’s jealous, I said to
myself, she’s envious, she hates me. Yes, that was the truth. A long procession
of seconds passed; the mother of the Solaras didn’t return to my mind, her
body marked by death vanished. Instead I wondered anxiously: Why doesn’t
Nino call, is it possible that now that I’ve told everything to Lila, he’ll retreat
and make me ridiculous? For an instant I saw myself exposed to her in all my
possible pettiness as a person who had ruined herself for nothing. Then the
telephone rang again. When I grabbed the receiver, I had words on my tongue
ready for Lila: Don’t ever concern yourself with me again, you have no right to
Nino,  let  me  make  my  own  mistakes.  But  it  wasn’t  her.  It  was  Nino  and  I
overwhelmed him with broken phrases, happy to hear him. I told him how
things had been arranged with Pietro and the children, I told him that it was
impossible to reach an agreement with calm and reason, I told him that I had
packed  my  suitcase  and  couldn’t  wait  to  hold  him.  He  told  me  of  furious
quarrels with his wife, the last hours had been intolerable. He whispered: Even
though I’m very frightened, I can’t think of my life without you.
The next day, while Pietro was at the university, I asked the neighbor if she
would keep Dede and Elsa for a few hours. I put on the kitchen table the letters
I had written and I left. I thought: Something great is happening that will
dissolve the old way of living entirely and I’m part of that dissolution. I joined
Nino in Rome, we met in a hotel near the station. Holding him tight, I said to
myself: I’ll never get used to that nervous body, it’s a constant surprise, long
bones,  skin  with  an  exciting  smell,  a  mass,  a  force,  a  mobility  completely
different from what Pietro is, the habits we had.
The next morning, for the first time in my life, I boarded an airplane. I didn’t
know how to fasten my seat belt, Nino helped me. How thrilling it was to
squeeze his hand while the sound of the engines grew louder, louder, and
louder, and the plane began its takeoff. How exciting it was to lift off from the
ground with a jerk and see the houses that became parallelopipeds and the
streets that changed into strips and the countryside that was reduced to a
green patch, and the sea that inclined like a compact paving stone, and the
clouds that fell below in a landslide of soft rocks, and the anguish, the pain, the
very happiness that became part of a unique, luminous motion. It seemed to
me that flying subjected everything to a process of simplification, and I sighed,
I tried to lose myself. Every so often I asked Nino: Are you happy? And he
nodded yes, kissed me. At times I had the impression that the floor under my
feet—the only surface I could count on—was trembling.
