1.
I
n the spring of 1966, Lila, in a state of great agitation, entrusted to me a metal
box that contained eight notebooks. She said that she could no longer keep
them at home, she was afraid her husband might read them. I carried off the
box  without  comment,  apart  from  some  ironic  allusions  to  the  excessive
amount of string she had tied around it. At that time our relationship was
terrible, but it seemed that only I considered it that way. The rare times we saw
each other, she showed no embarrassment, only affection; a hostile word never
slipped out.
When she asked me to swear that I wouldn’t open the box for any reason, I
swore.  But  as  soon  as  I  was  on  the  train  I  untied  the  string,  took  out  the
notebooks,  began  to  read.  It  wasn’t  a  diary,  although  there  were  detailed
accounts of the events of her life, starting with the end of elementary school.
Rather, it seemed evidence of a stubborn self-discipline in writing. The pages
were full of descriptions: the branch of a tree, the ponds, a stone, a leaf with its
white veinings, the pots in the kitchen, the various parts of a coffeemaker, the
brazier, the coal and bits of coal, a highly detailed map of the courtyard, the
broad avenue of stradone, the rusting iron structure beyond the ponds, the
gardens and the church, the cut of the vegetation alongside the railway, the
new buildings, her parents’ house, the tools her father and her brother used to
repair shoes, their gestures when they worked, and above all colors, the colors
of every object at different times of the day. But there were not only pages of
description.  Isolated  words  appeared,  in  dialect  and  in  Italian,  sometimes
circled,  without  comment.  And  Latin  and  Greek  translation  exercises.  And
entire passages in English on the neighborhood shops and their wares, on the
cart  loaded  with  fruit  and  vegetables  that  Enzo  Scanno  took  through  the
streets every day, leading the mule by the halter. And many observations on
the books she read, the films she saw in the church hall. And many of the ideas
that she had asserted in the discussions with Pasquale, in the talks she and I
used to have. Of course, the progress was sporadic, but whatever Lila captured
in writing assumed importance, so that even in the pages written when she
was eleven or twelve there was not a single line that sounded childish.
Usually the sentences were extremely precise, the punctuation meticulous,
the handwriting elegant, just as Maestra Oliviero had taught us. But at times, as
if a drug had flooded her veins, Lila seemed unable to bear the order she had
imposed on herself. Everything then became breathless, the sentences took on
an overexcited rhythm, the punctuation disappeared. In general it didn’t take
long for her to return to a clear, easy pace. But it might also happen that she
broke off abruptly and filled the rest of the page with little drawings of twisted
trees, humped, smoking mountains, grim faces. I was entranced by both the
order and the disorder, and the more I read, the more deceived I felt. How
much practice there was behind the letter she had sent me on Ischia years
earlier: that was why it was so well written. I put everything back in the box,
promising myself not to become inquisitive again.
But I soon gave in—the notebooks exuded the force of seduction that Lila
had given off since she was a child. She had treated the neighborhood, her
family, the Solaras, Stefano, every person or thing with ruthless accuracy. And
what to say of the liberty she had taken with me, with what I said, with what I
thought, with the people I loved, with my very physical appearance. She had
fixed moments that were decisive for her without worrying about anything or
anyone. Here vividly was the pleasure she had felt when at ten she wrote her
story, The Blue Fairy. Here just as vivid was what she had suffered when our
teacher Maestra Oliviero hadn’t deigned to say a single word about that story,
in fact had ignored it. Here was the suffering and the fury because I had gone
to middle school, neglecting her, abandoning her. Here the excitement with
which she had learned to repair shoes, the desire to prove herself that had
induced her to design new shoes, and the pleasure of completing the first pair
with her brother Rino. Here the pain when Fernando, her father, had said that
the  shoes  weren’t  well  made.  There  was  everything,  in  those  pages,  but
especially hatred for the Solara brothers, the fierce determination with which
she had rejected the love of the older, Marcello, and the moment when she had
decided, instead, to marry the gentle Stefano Carracci, the grocer, who out of
love had wanted to buy the first pair of shoes she had made, vowing that he
would keep them forever. Ah, the wonderful moment when, at fifteen, she had
felt herself a rich and elegant lady, on the arm of her fiancé, who, all because
he loved her, had invested a lot of money in her father and brother’s shoe
business: Cerullo shoes. And how much satisfaction she had felt: the shoes of
her  imagination  in  large  part  realized,  a  house  in  the  new  neighborhood,
marriage at sixteen. And what a lavish wedding, how happy she was. Then
Marcello Solara, with his brother Michele, had appeared in the middle of the
festivities, wearing on his feet the very shoes that her husband had said were
so dear to him. Her husband. What sort of man had she married? Now, when it
was all over, would the false face be torn off, revealing the horribly true one
underneath? Questions, and the facts, without embellishment, of our poverty. I
devoted myself to those pages, for days, for weeks. I studied them. I ended up
learning by heart the passages I liked, the ones that thrilled me, the ones that
hypnotized me, the ones that humiliated me. Behind their naturalness was
surely some artifice, but I couldn’t discover what it was.
Finally, one evening in November, exasperated, I went out carrying the box.
I couldn’t stand feeling Lila on me and in me, even now that I was esteemed
myself, even now that I had a life outside of Naples. I stopped on the Solferino
bridge to look at the lights filtered through a cold mist. I placed the box on the
parapet, and pushed it slowly, a little at a time, until it fell into the river, as if it
were her, Lila in person, plummeting, with her thoughts, words, the malice
with which she struck back at anyone, the way she appropriated me, as she did
every person or thing or event or thought that touched her: books and shoes,
sweetness and violence, the marriage and the wedding night, the return to the
neighborhood in the new role of Signora Raffaella Carracci.
2.
I couldn’t believe that Stefano, so kind, so in love, had given Marcello Solara
the vestige of the child Lila, the evidence of her work on the shoes she had
designed.
I forgot about Alfonso and Marisa, who, sitting at the table, were talking to
each other, eyes shining. I paid no more attention to my mother’s drunken
laughter. The music faded, along with the voice of the singer, the dancing
couples, and Antonio, who had gone out to the terrace and, overwhelmed by
jealousy, was standing outside the glass door staring at the violet city, the sea.
Even the image of Nino, who had just left the room like an archangel without
annunciations,  grew  faint.  Now  I  saw  only  Lila,  speaking  animatedly  into
Stefano’s ear, she very pale in her wedding dress, he unsmiling, a white patch
of unease running over his flushed face from his forehead to his eyes like a
Carnival mask. What was happening, what would happen? My friend tugged
her husband’s arm with both hands. She used all her strength, and I who knew
her thoroughly felt that if she could she would have wrenched it from his body,
crossed the room holding it high above her head, blood dripping in her train,
and she would have used it as a club or a donkey’s jawbone to crush Marcello’s
face with a solid blow. Ah yes, she would have done it, and at the idea my heart
pounded furiously, my throat became dry. Then she would have dug out the
eyes of both men, she would have torn the flesh from the bones of their faces,
she would have bitten them. Yes, yes, I felt that I wanted that, I wanted it to
happen. An end of love and of that intolerable celebration, no embraces in a
bed  in  Amalfi.  Immediately  shatter  everything  and  every  person  in  the
neighborhood,  tear  them  to  pieces,  Lila  and  I,  go  and  live  far  away,
lightheartedly  descending  together  all  the  steps  of  humiliation,  alone,  in
unknown cities. It seemed to me the just conclusion to that day. If nothing
could save us, not money, not a male body, and not even studying, we might as
well destroy everything immediately. Her rage expanded in my breast, a force
that was mine and not mine, filling me with the pleasure of losing myself. I
wished that that force would overflow. But I realized that I was also afraid of it.
I understood only later that I can be quietly unhappy, because I’m incapable of
violent reactions, I fear them, I prefer to be still, cultivating resentment. Not
Lila. When she left her seat, she got up so decisively that the table shook, along
with the silverware on the dirty plates; a glass was overturned. As Stefano
hurried mechanically to cut off the tongue of wine that was heading toward
Signora Solara’s dress, Lila went out quickly through a side door, jerking her
dress away whenever it got caught.
I thought of running after her, grabbing her hand, whispering to her let’s get
out,  out  of  here.  But  I  didn’t  move.  Stefano  moved,  after  a  moment  of
uncertainty, and, making his way among the dancing couples, joined her.
I looked around. Everyone realized that something had upset the bride. But
Marcello continued to chat in a conspiratorial way with Rino, as if it were
normal for him to have those shoes on his feet. The increasingly lewd toasts of
the metal merchant continued. Those who felt at the bottom of the hierarchy
of tables and guests went on struggling to put a good face on things. In other
words, no one except me seemed to realize that the marriage that had just
been celebrated—and that would probably last until the death of the spouses,
among  the  births  of  many  children,  many  more  grandchildren,  joys  and
sorrows, silver and gold wedding anniversaries—that for Lila, no matter what
her husband did in his attempt to be forgiven, that marriage was already over.
3.
At first the events disappointed me. I sat with Alfonso and Marisa, paying no
attention  to  their  conversation.  I  waited  for  signs  of  revolt,  but  nothing
happened. To be inside Lila’s head was, as usual, difficult: I didn’t hear her
shouting, I didn’t hear her threatening. Stefano reappeared half an hour later,
very friendly. He had changed his clothes; the white patch on his forehead and
around his eyes had vanished. He strolled about among friends and relatives
waiting for his wife to arrive, and when she returned to the hall not in her
wedding dress but in her traveling outfit, a pastel-blue suit, with very pale
buttons, and a blue hat, he joined her immediately. Lila distributed sugared
almonds to the children, taking them from a crystal bowl with a silver spoon,
then she moved among the tables handing out the wedding favors, first to her
relatives, then to Stefano’s. She ignored the entire Solara family and even her
brother Rino, who asked her with an anxious half-smile: Don’t you love me
anymore? She didn’t answer, but gave the wedding favor to Pinuccia. She had
an absent gaze, her cheekbones appeared more prominent than usual. When
she got to me, she distractedly handed me, without even a smile of complicity,
the white tulle-wrapped ceramic basket full of sugared almonds.
The Solaras were irritated by that discourtesy, but Stefano made up for it,
embracing  them  one  by  one,  with  a  pleasant,  soothing  expression,  and
murmuring, “She’s tired, be patient.”
He kissed Rino, too, on the cheeks, but his brother-in-law gave a sign of
displeasure, and I heard him say, “It’s not tiredness, Ste’, she was born twisted
and I’m sorry for you.”
Stefano answered seriously, “Twisted things get straightened out.”
Afterward I saw him hurry after his wife, who was already at the door, while
the orchestra spewed drunken sounds and people crowded around for the final
goodbyes.
No rupture, then, we would not run away together through the streets of the
world.  I  imagined  the  newlyweds,  handsome,  elegant,  getting  into  the
convertible. Soon they would be on the Amalfi coast, in a luxurious hotel, and
every  bloodcurdling  insult  would  have  changed  into  a  bad  mood  that  was
easily  erased.  No  second  thoughts.  Lila  had  detached  herself  from  me
definitively and—it suddenly seemed to me—the distance was in fact greater
than I had imagined. She wasn’t only married, her submission to conjugal rites
would not be limited merely to sleeping with a man every night. There was
something I hadn’t understood, which at that moment seemed to me obvious.
Lila—bowing to the fact that some business arrangement or other between her
husband and Marcello had been sealed by her girlish labors—had admitted that
she cared about him more than any other person or thing. If she had already
yielded, if she had already swallowed that insult, her bond with Stefano must
truly be strong. She loved him, she loved him like the girls in the photonovels.
For her whole life she would sacrifice to him every quality of her own, and he
wouldn’t even be aware of the sacrifice, he would be surrounded by the wealth
of feeling, intelligence, imagination that were hers, without knowing what to
do  with  them,  he  would  ruin  them.  I,  I  thought,  am  not  capable  of  loving
anyone like that, not even Nino, all I know is how to get along with books. And
for a fraction of a second I saw myself identical to a dented bowl in which my
sister Elisa used to feed a stray cat, until he disappeared, and the bowl stood
empty, gathering dust on the landing. At that point, with a sharp sense of
anguish, I felt sure that I had ventured too far. I must go back, I said to myself, I
should be like Carmela, Ada, Gigliola, Lila herself. Accept the neighborhood,
expel pride, punish presumption, stop humiliating the people who love me.
When Alfonso and Marisa went off to meet Nino, I, making a large detour to
avoid my mother, joined my boyfriend on the terrace.
My dress was too light: the sun had gone, it was beginning to get cold. As
soon as he saw me, Antonio lit a cigarette and pretended to look at the sea
again.
“Let’s go,” I said.
“Go yourself, with Sarratore’s son.”
“I want to go with you.”
“You’re a liar.”
“Why?”
“Because if he wanted you, you would leave me here without so much as a
goodbye.”
It was true, but it enraged me that he said it so openly, heedless of the
words. I hissed, “If you don’t understand that I’m here running the risk that at
any moment my mother might show up and start hitting me because of you,
then it means that you’re thinking only of yourself, that I don’t matter to you
at all.”
He heard scarcely any dialect in my voice, he noted the long sentence, the
subjunctives, and he lost his temper. He threw away the cigarette, grabbed me
by the wrist with a barely controlled force and cried—a cry locked in his throat
—that he was there for me, only for me, that it was I who had told him to stay
near me in the church and at the celebration, yes, I, and you made me swear,
he gasped, swear, you said, that you won’t ever leave me alone, and so I had a
suit made, and I’m deep in debt to Signora Solara, and to please you, to do as
you asked, I didn’t spend even a minute with my mother or my sisters and
brothers: and what is my reward, my reward is that you treat me like shit, you
talk the whole time to the poet’s son and humiliate me in front of my friends,
you make me look ridiculous, because to you I’m no one, because you’re so
educated and I’m not, because I don’t understand the things you say, and it’s
true, it’s very true that I don’t understand you, but God damn it, Lenù, look at
me, look me in the face: you think you can order me around, you think I’m not
capable of saying That’s enough, and yet you’re wrong, you know everything,
but you don’t know that if you go out of that door with me now, if now I tell
you  O.K.  and  we  go  out,  but  then  I  discover  that  you  see  that  jerk  Nino
Sarratore at school, and who knows where else, I’ll kill you, Lenù, so think
about it, leave me here this minute, he said in despair, leave me, because it’s
better for you, and meanwhile he looked at me, his eyes red and very large, and
uttered the words with his mouth wide open, shouting at me without shouting,
his nostrils flaring, black, and in his face such suffering that I thought Maybe
he’s hurting himself inside, because the words, shouted in his throat like that,
in  his  chest,  but  without  exploding  in  the  air,  are  like  bits  of  sharp  iron
piercing his lungs and his pharynx.
I had a confused need for that aggression. The vise on my wrist, the fear that
he would hit me, that river of painful words ended by consoling me: it seemed
to me that at least he valued me.
“You’re hurting me,” I muttered.
He slowly relaxed his grip, but remained staring at me with his mouth open.
The skin of my wrist was turning purple, giving him weight and authority,
anchoring me to him.
“What do you choose?” he asked.
“I want to stay with you,” I said, but sullenly.
He closed his mouth, his eyes filled with tears, he looked at the sea to give
himself time to suppress them.
Soon afterward we were in the street. We didn’t wait for Pasquale, Enzo, the
girls, we didn’t say goodbye to anyone. The most important thing was not to be
seen by my mother, so we slipped away on foot; by now it was dark. For a while
we walked beside each other without touching, then Antonio hesitantly put an
arm around my shoulders. He wanted me to understand that he expected to be
forgiven, as if he were the guilty one. Because he loved me, he had decided to
consider the hours that, right before his eyes, I had spent with Nino, seducing
and seduced, a time of hallucinations.
“Did I leave a bruise?” he asked, trying to take my wrist.
I didn’t answer. He grasped my shoulder with his broad hand, I made a
movement of annoyance that immediately caused him to relax his grip. He
waited, I waited. When he tried again to send out that signal of surrender, I put
an arm around his waist.
4.
We kissed without stopping, behind a tree, in the doorway of a building,
along dark alleys. We took a bus, then another, and reached the station. We
went toward the ponds on foot, still kissing each other on the nearly deserted
street that skirted the railroad tracks.
I  was  hot,  even  though  my  dress  was  light  and  the  cold  of  the  evening
pierced the heat of my skin with sudden shivers. Every so often Antonio clung
to me in the shadows, embracing me with such ardor that it hurt. His lips were
burning, and the heat of his mouth kindled my thoughts and my imagination.
Maybe Lila and Stefano, I said to myself, are already in the hotel. Maybe they’re
having dinner. Maybe they’re getting ready for the night. Ah, to sleep next to a
man, not to be cold. I felt Antonio’s tongue moving around my mouth and
while he pressed my breasts through the material of my dress, I touched his
sex through the pocket of his pants.
The black sky was stained with pale clouds of stars. The ponds’ odor of moss
and putrid earth was yielding to the sweeter scents of spring. The grass was
wet, the water abruptly hiccupped, as if an acorn had fallen in it, a rock, a frog.
We took a path we knew well, which led to a stand of dead trees, with slender
trunks and broken branches. A little farther on was the old canning factory,
with its caved-in roof, all iron beams and fragments of metal. I felt an urgency
of pleasure, something that drew me from inside like a smooth strip of velvet. I
wanted desire to find a violent satisfaction, capable of shattering that whole
day.  I  felt  it  rubbing,  caressing  and  pricking  at  the  base  of  my  stomach,
stronger than it had ever been. Antonio spoke words of love in dialect, he
spoke them in my mouth, on my neck, insisting. I was silent, I was always silent
during those encounters, I only sighed.
“Tell me you love me,” he begged.
“Yes.”
“Tell me.”
“Yes.”
I  said  nothing  else.  I  embraced  him,  I  clasped  him  to  me  with  all  my
strength. I would have liked to be caressed and kissed over every inch of my
body, I felt the need to be rubbed, bitten, I wanted my breath to fail. He pushed
me a little away from him and slid a hand into my bra as he continued to kiss
me. But it wasn’t enough for me, that night it was too little. All the contact that
we had had up to that minute, that he had imposed on me with caution and
that  I  had  accepted  with  equal  caution,  now  seemed  to  me  inadequate,
uncomfortable, too quick. Yet I didn’t know how to tell him that I wanted
more, I didn’t have the words. In each of our secret meetings we celebrated a
silent  rite,  stage  by  stage.  He  caressed  my  breasts,  he  lifted  my  skirt,  he
touched me between the legs, and meanwhile he pushed against me, like a
signal, the convulsion of tender flesh and cartilage and veins and blood that
vibrated in his pants. But that night I delayed pulling out his sex; I knew that as
soon as I did he would forget about me, he would stop touching me. Breasts,
hips, bottom, pubis would no longer occupy him, he would be concentrated
only on my hand, in fact he would tighten his around it to encourage me to
move it with the right rhythm. Then he would get out his handkerchief and
keep it ready for the moment when a light rattling sound would come from his
mouth and from his penis his dangerous liquid. Finally he would draw back,
slightly  dazed,  perhaps  embarrassed,  and  we  would  go  home.  A  habitual
conclusion, which I now felt a confused need to change: I didn’t care about
being pregnant without being married, I didn’t care about the sin, the divine
overseers nesting in the cosmos above us, the Holy Spirit or any of his stand-
ins,  and  Antonio  felt  this  and  was  disoriented.  While  he  kissed  me,  with
growing agitation, he tried repeatedly to bring my hand down, but I pulled it
away, I pushed my pubis against his fingers, I pushed hard and repeatedly, with
drawn-out sighs. Then he withdrew his hand, he tried to unbutton his pants.
“Wait,” I said.
I drew him toward the skeleton of the canning factory. It was darker there,
more sheltered, but I could hear the wary rustling of scampering mice. My
heart began to beat hard, I was afraid of the place, of myself, of the craving
that possessed me to obliterate from my manners and from my voice the sense
of alienation that I had discovered a few hours earlier. I wanted to return, and
sink into that neighborhood, to be as I had been. I wanted to throw away
studying, the notebooks full of exercises. Exercising for what, after all. What I
could  become  outside  of  Lila’s  shadow  counted  for  nothing.  What  was  I
compared with her in her wedding dress, with her in the convertible, the blue
hat and the pastel suit? What was I, here with Antonio, secretly, in this rusting
ruin, with the scurrying rats, my skirt raised over my hips, my underpants
lowered, yearning and anguished and guilty, while she lay naked, with languid
detachment, on linen sheets, in a hotel that looked out on the sea, and let
Stefano violate her, enter her completely, give her his seed, impregnate her
legitimately and without fear? What was I as Antonio fumbled with his pants
and placed his gross male flesh between my legs, against my naked sex, and
clutching my buttocks rubbed against me, moving back and forth, panting? I
didn’t know. I knew only that I was not what I wanted at that moment. It
wasn’t enough for him to rub against me. I wanted to be penetrated, I wanted
to tell Lila when she returned: I’m not a virgin, either, what you do I do, you
can’t leave me behind. So I held Antonio tight around his neck and kissed him,
I stood on tiptoe, I sought his sex with mine, I sought it wordlessly, by trial and
error. He realized it and helped me with his hand, I felt him entering just a
little, I trembled with curiosity and fear. But I also felt the effort he was making
to stop, to keep from pushing with all the violence that had been smoldering
for an entire afternoon and surely was still. He was about to stop, I realized,
and I pressed against him to persuade him to continue.
But with a deep breath Antonio pushed me away and said in dialect, “No,
Lenù, I want to do it the way it’s done with a wife, not like this.”
He grabbed my right hand, brought it to his sex with a kind of repressed sob,
and I resigned myself to masturbating him.
Afterward, as we were leaving the ponds, he said uneasily that he respected
me and didn’t want to make me do something that I would later regret, not in
that place, not in that dirty and careless way. He spoke as if it were he who had
gone too far, and maybe he believed that. I didn’t utter a single word the whole
way, and said goodbye with relief. When I knocked on the door, my mother
opened it and, in vain restrained by my brothers and sister, without yelling,
without a word of reproach, began hitting me. My glasses flew to the floor and
immediately I shouted with bitter joy, and not a hint of dialect, “See what
you’ve done? You’ve broken my glasses and now because of you I can’t study,
I’m not going to school anymore.”
My mother froze, even the hand she had struck me with remained still in the
air, like the blade of an axe.
Elisa, my little sister, picked up the glasses and said softly, “Here, Lenù,
they’re not broken.”
5.
I  was  overcome  by  an  exhaustion  that,  no  matter  how  much  I  rested,
wouldn’t go away. For the first time, I skipped school. I was absent, I think, for
some two weeks, and not even to Antonio did I say that I couldn’t stand it
anymore, I wanted to stop. I left home at the usual time, and wandered all
morning  through  the  city.  I  learned  a  lot  about  Naples  in  that  period.  I
rummaged  among  the  used  books  in  the  stalls  of  Port’Alba,  unwillingly
absorbing titles and authors’ names, and continued toward Toledo and the sea.
Or I climbed the Vomero on Via Salvator Rosa, went up to San Martino, came
back down by the Petraio. Or I explored the Doganella, went to the cemetery,
wandered on the silent paths, read the names of the dead. Sometimes idle
young men, stupid old men, even respectable middle-aged men pursued me
with obscene offers. I quickened my pace, eyes lowered, I escaped, sensing
danger, but didn’t stop. In fact the more I skipped school the bigger the hole
that  those  long  mornings  of  wandering  made  in  the  net  of  scholastic
obligations that had imprisoned me since I was six years old. At the proper
time I went home and no one suspected that I, I, had not gone to school. I spent
the afternoon reading novels, then I hurried to the ponds, to Antonio, who was
very happy that I was so available. He would have liked to ask if I had seen
Sarratore’s son. I read the question in his eyes, but he didn’t dare ask, he was
afraid of a quarrel, he was afraid that I would get angry and deny him those
few minutes of pleasure. He embraced me, to feel me compliant against his
body, to chase away any doubt. At those moments he dismissed the possibility
that I could insult him by also seeing that other.
He was wrong: in reality, although I felt guilty, I thought only of Nino. I
wanted to see him, talk to him, and on the other hand I was afraid to. I was
afraid that he would humiliate me with his superiority. I was afraid that one
way  or  another  he  would  return  to  the  reasons  that  the  article  about  my
quarrel with the religion teacher hadn’t been published. I was afraid that he
would report to me the cruel judgments of the editors. I couldn’t have borne it.
While I drifted through the city, and at night, in bed, when I couldn’t sleep and
felt my inadequacy with utter clarity, I preferred to believe that my text had
been rejected for pure and simple lack of space. Let it diminish, fade. But it was
hard. I hadn’t been equal to Nino’s brilliance, and so I couldn’t stay with him,
be listened to, tell him my thoughts. What thoughts, after all? I didn’t have
any.  Better  to  eliminate  myself—no  more  books,  grades,  praise.  I  hoped  to
forget everything, slowly: the notions that crowded my head, the languages
living and dead, Italian itself that rose now to my lips even with my sister and
brothers. It’s Lila’s fault, I thought, if I started down this path, I have to forget
her, too: Lila always knew what she wanted and got it; I don’t want anything,
I’m made of nothing. I hoped to wake in the morning without desires. Once I
was emptied—I imagined—the affection of Antonio, my affection for him will
be enough.
Then one day, on the way home, I met Pinuccia, Stefano’s sister. I learned
from her that Lila had returned from her honeymoon and had had a big lunch
to celebrate the engagement of her sister-in-law and her brother.
“You and Rino are engaged?” I asked, feigning surprise.
“Yes,” she said, radiant, and showed me the ring he had given her.
I remember that while Pinuccia was talking I had a single, twisted thought:
Lila had a party at her new house and didn’t invite me, but it’s better that way,
I’m glad, stop comparing myself to her, I don’t want to see her anymore. Only
when every detail of the engagement had been examined did I ask, hesitantly,
about my friend. With a treacherous half smile, Pinuccia offered a formula in
dialect: she’s learning. I didn’t ask what. When I got home I slept for the whole
afternoon.
The next morning I went out at seven as usual to go to school, or, rather, to
pretend to go to school. I had just crossed the stradone, when I saw Lila get out
of  the  convertible  and  enter  our  courtyard  without  even  turning  to  say
goodbye to Stefano, who was at the wheel. She had dressed with care, and wore
large dark glasses, even though there was no sun. I was struck by a scarf of blue
voile that she had knotted in such a way that it covered her lips, too. I thought
resentfully that this was her new style—not Jackie Kennedy but, rather, the
mysterious  lady  we  had  imagined  we  would  become  ever  since  we  were
children. I kept going without calling to her.
After a few steps, however, I turned back, not with a clear intention but
because I couldn’t help it. My heart was pounding, my feelings were confused.
Maybe I wanted to ask her to tell me to my face that our friendship was over.
Maybe I wanted to cry out that I, too, had decided to stop studying and get
married—to go and live at Antonio’s house with his mother and his brothers
and sisters, wash the stairs like Melina the madwoman. I crossed the courtyard
quickly,  I  saw  her  go  in  the  entranceway  that  led  to  her  mother-in-law’s
apartment. I started up the stairs, the same ones we had climbed together as
children when we went to ask Don Achille to give us our dolls. I called her, she
turned.
“You’re back,” I said.
“Yes.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
“I didn’t want you to see me.”
“Others can see you and not me?”
“I don’t care about others, I do care about you.”
I looked at her uncertainly. What was I not supposed to see? I climbed the
stairs  that  separated  us  and  delicately  pulled  aside  the  scarf,  raised  the
sunglasses.
6.
I do it again now, in my imagination, as I begin to tell the story of her
honeymoon, not only as she told it to me there on the landing but as I read it
later, in her notebooks. I had been unjust to her, I had wished to believe in an
easy surrender on her part to be able to humiliate her as I felt humiliated when
Nino left the reception; I had wished to diminish her in order not to feel her
loss. There she is, instead, the reception now over, shut up in the convertible,
the blue hat, the pastel suit. Her eyes were burning with rage and as soon as
the  car  started  she  blasted  Stefano  with  the  most  intolerable  words  and
phrases of our neighborhood.
He swallowed the insults in his usual way, with a faint smile, not saying a
word, and finally she was silent. But the silence didn’t last. Lila started again
calmly, but panting slightly. She told him that she wouldn’t stay in that car a
minute longer, that it disgusted her to breathe the air that he breathed, that
she wanted to get out, immediately. Stefano saw the disgust in her face, yet he
continued to drive, without saying anything, so she raised her voice again to
make him stop. Then he pulled over, but when Lila tried to open the door he
grabbed her firmly by the wrist.
“Now  listen  to  me,”  he  said  softly.  “There  are  serious  reasons  for  what
happened.”
He explained to her in placid tones how it went. To keep the shoe factory
from closing down before it even opened its doors, he had found it necessary to
enter into a partnership with Silvio Solara and his sons, who alone could insure
not only that the shoes were placed in the best shops in the city but that in the
fall a shop selling Cerullo shoes exclusively would open in Piazza dei Martiri.
“What do I care about your necessities,” Lila interrupted him, struggling to
get free.
“My necessities are yours, you’re my wife.”
“I? I’m nothing to you, nor are you to me. Let go of my arm.”
Stefano let go of her arm.
“Your father and brother are nothing, either?”
“Wash your mouth out when you talk about them, you’re not fit to even
mention their names.”
But Stefano did mention their names. He said that it was Francesco himself
who had wanted to make the agreement with Silvio Solara. He said that the
biggest obstacle had been Marcello, who was extremely angry at Lila, at the
whole Cerullo family, and, especially, at Pasquale, Antonio, and Enzo, who had
smashed his car and beaten him up. He said that Rino had calmed him down,
that it had taken a lot of patience, and so when Marcello had said, then I want
the shoes that Lina made, Rino had said O.K., take the shoes.
It was a bad moment, Lila felt as if she’d been stabbed in the chest. But just
the same she cried, “And you, what did you do?”
Stefano had a moment of embarrassment.
“What was I supposed to do? Fight with your brother, ruin your family, start
a war against your friends, lose all the money I invested?”
To  Lila,  every  word,  in  both  tone  and  content,  seemed  a  hypocritical
admission of guilt. She didn’t even let him finish, but began hitting him on the
shoulder with her fists, yelling, “So even you, you said O.K., you went and got
the shoes, you gave them to him?”
Stefano let her go on, but when she tried again to open the door and escape
he said to her coldly, Calm down. Lila turned suddenly: calm down after he had
thrown the blame on her father and brother, calm down when all three had
treated her like an old rag, a rag for wiping up the floor. I don’t want to calm
down, she shouted, you piece of shit, take me home right now, repeat what you
just said in front of those two other shit men. And only when she uttered that
expression in dialect, shit men, uommen’e mmerd, did she notice that she had
broken  the  barrier  of  her  husband’s  measured  tones.  A  second  afterward
Stefano struck her in the face with his strong hand, a violent slap that seemed
to her an explosion of truth. She winced, startled by the painful burning of her
cheek. She looked at him, incredulous, while he started the car and said, in a
voice that for the first time since he had begun to court her was not calm, that
in fact trembled, “See what you’ve made me do? See how you go too far?”
“We’ve been wrong about everything,” she murmured.
But  Stefano  denied  it  decisively,  as  if  he  refused  even  to  consider  that
possibility, and he made a long speech, part threatening, part didactic, part
pathetic.
He said, more or less, “We haven’t been wrong about anything, Lina, we just
have to get a few things straight. Your name is no longer Cerullo. You are
Signora Carracci and you must do as I say. I know, you’re not practical, you
don’t know what business is, you think I find money lying on the ground. But
it’s not like that. I have to make money every day, I have to put it where it can
grow. You designed the shoes, your father and brother are good workers, but
the three of you together aren’t capable of making money grow. The Solaras
are, and so—please listen to me—I don’t give a damn if you don’t like those
people. Marcello is repulsive to me, too, and when he looks at you, even so
much as out of the corner of his eye, when I think of the things he said about
you, I feel like sticking a knife in his stomach. But if he is useful for making
money, then he becomes my best friend. And you know why? Because if we
don’t make money we don’t have this car, I can’t buy you that dress, we lose
the house with everything in it, in the end you can’t act the lady, and our
children grow up like the children of beggars. So just try saying again what you
said tonight and I will ruin that beautiful face of yours so that you can’t go out
of the house. You understand? Answer me.”
Lila’s eyes narrowed to cracks. Her cheek had turned purple, but otherwise
she was very pale. She didn’t answer him.
7.
They reached Amalfi in the evening. Neither had ever been to a hotel, and
they were embarrassed and ill at ease. Stefano was especially intimidated by
the  vaguely  mocking  tones  of  the  receptionist  and,  without  meaning  to,
assumed  a  subservient  attitude.  When  he  realized  it,  he  covered  his
discomfiture with brusque manners, and his ears flushed merely at the request
to show his documents. Meanwhile the porter appeared, a man in his fifties
with a thin mustache, but Stefano refused his help, as if he were a thief, then,
thinking better of it, disdainfully gave him a large tip, even though he didn’t
take advantage of his services. Lila followed her husband as he carried the
suitcases up the stairs and—she told me—for the first time had the impression
that somewhere along the way she had lost the youth she had married that
morning, and was in the company of a stranger. Was Stefano really so broad,
his legs short and fat, his arms long, his knuckles white? To whom had she
bound herself forever? The rage that had overwhelmed her during the journey
gave way to anxiety.
Once they were in the room he made an effort to be affectionate again, but
he was tired and still unnerved by the slap he had had to give her. He assumed
an artificial tone. He praised the room, it was very spacious, opened the French
window, went out on the balcony, said to her, Come and smell the fragrant air,
look how the sea sparkles. But she was seeking a way out of that trap, and,
distracted, shook her head no, she was cold. Stefano immediately closed the
window, and remarked that if they wanted to take a walk and eat outside
they’d better put on something warmer, saying, Just in case get me a vest, as if
they had already been living together for many years and she knew how to dig
expertly in the suitcases, to pull out a vest for him exactly as she would have
found a sweater for herself. Lila seemed to agree, but in fact she didn’t open
the suitcases, she took out neither sweater nor vest. She immediately went out
into the corridor, she didn’t want to stay in the room a minute longer. He
followed her muttering: I’m also fine like this, but I’m worried about you, you’ll
catch cold.
They wandered around Amalfi, to the cathedral, up the steps and back down
again, to the fountain. Stefano now tried to amuse her, but being amusing had
never  been  his  strong  point,  sentimental  tones  suited  him  better,  or  the
sententious phrases of the mature man who knows what he wants. Lila barely
responded, and in the end her husband confined himself to pointing out this
and  that,  exclaiming,  Look.  But  she,  who  in  other  times  would  have
appreciated every stone, wasn’t interested in the beauty of the narrow streets
or the scents of the gardens or the art and history of Amalfi, or, especially, the
voice of her husband, who kept saying, tiresomely, Beautiful, isn’t it?
Soon Lila began to tremble, but not because she was particularly cold; it was
nerves.  He  realized  it  and  proposed  that  they  return  to  the  hotel,  even
venturing a remark like: Then we can hug each other and get warm. But she
wanted to keep walking, on and on, until, overcome by weariness, and though
she wasn’t at all hungry, she entered a restaurant, without consulting him.
Stefano followed her patiently.
They ordered all kinds of things, ate almost nothing, drank a lot of wine. At a
certain point he could no longer hold back, and asked if she was still angry. Lila
shook her head no, and it was true. At that question, she herself was amazed
not to feel the least rancor toward the Solaras, or her father and brother, or
Stefano. Everything had rapidly changed in her mind. Suddenly, she didn’t care
at all about the shoes; in fact she couldn’t understand why she had been so
enraged at seeing them on Marcello’s feet. Now, instead, the broad wedding
band  that  gleamed  on  her  ring  finger  frightened  and  distressed  her.  In
disbelief,  she  retraced  the  day:  the  church,  the  ceremony,  the  celebration.
What have I done, she thought, dazed by wine, and what is this gold circle, this
glittering zero I’ve stuck my finger in. Stefano had one, too, and it shone amid
the black hairs, hairy fingers, as the books said. She remembered him in his
bathing suit, as she had seen him at the beach. The broad chest, the large
kneecaps, like overturned pots. There was not the smallest detail that, once
recalled, revealed to her any charm. He was a being, now, with whom she felt
she could share nothing and yet there he was, in his jacket and tie, he moved
his fat lips and scratched the fleshy lobe of an ear and kept sticking his fork in
something on her plate to taste it. He had little or nothing to do with the seller
of cured meats who had attracted her, with the ambitious, self-confident, but
well-mannered  youth,  with  the  bridegroom  of  that  morning  in  church.  He
revealed white jaws, a red tongue in the dark hole of his mouth: something in
and around him had broken. At that table, amid the coming and going of the
waiters, everything that had brought her here to Amalfi seemed without any
logical  coherence  and  yet  unbearably  real.  Thus,  while  the  face  of  that
unrecognizable being lighted up at the idea that the storm had passed, that she
had understood his reasons, that she had accepted them, that he could finally
talk to her about his big plans, she suddenly had the idea of stealing a knife
from the table to stick in his throat when, in the room, he tried to deflower
her.
In the end she didn’t do it. Since in that restaurant, at that table, to her
wine-fogged mind, her entire marriage, from the wedding dress to the ring,
had turned out to make no sense, it also seemed to her that any possible sexual
demand on Stefano’s part would make no sense, above all to him. So at first she
contemplated how to get the knife (she took the napkin off her lap, covered
the knife with it, placed both back on her lap, prepared to drop the knife in her
purse, and put the napkin back on the table), then she gave it up. The screws
holding together her new condition of wife, the restaurant, Amalfi, seemed to
her so loose that at the end of dinner Stefano’s voice no longer reached her, in
her  ears  there  was  only  a  clamor  of  objects,  living  beings,  and  thoughts,
without definition.
On the street, he started talking again about the good side of the Solaras.
They knew, he told her, important people in the city government, they had ties
to the parties, the monarchists, the Fascists. He liked to speak as if he really
understood something about the Solaras’ dealings, he took a knowing tone, he
said emphatically: Politics is ugly but it’s important for making money. Lila
remembered the discussions she had had with Pasquale in earlier times, and
even the ones she’d had with Stefano during their engagement, the plan to
separate  themselves  completely  from  their  parents,  from  the  abuses  and
hypocrisies  and  cruelties  of  the  past.  He  said  yes,  she  thought,  he  said  he
agreed, but he wasn’t listening to me. Who did I talk to. I don’t know this
person, I don’t know who he is.
And yet when he took her hand and whispered that he loved her, she didn’t
pull away. Maybe she planned to make him think that everything was in order,
that they really were bride and groom on their honeymoon, in order to wound
him more profoundly when she told him, with all the disgust she felt in her
stomach: to get into bed with the hotel porter or with you—you both have
smoke-yellowed fingers—it’s the same revolting thing to me. Or maybe—and
this I think is more likely—she was too frightened and by now was striving to
delay every reaction.
As soon as they were in the room, he tried to kiss her, and she recoiled.
Gravely, she opened the suitcase, took out her nightgown, gave her husband
his pajamas. That attention made him smile happily at her, and he tried again
to grab her. But she shut herself in the bathroom.
Alone, she washed her face for a long time to get rid of the stupor from the
wine, the impression of a world that had lost its contours. She didn’t succeed;
rather, the feeling that her very gestures lacked coordination intensified. What
can I do, she thought. Stay locked in here all night. And then.
She was sorry that she hadn’t taken the knife: for a moment, in fact, she
believed that she had, then was forced to admit she hadn’t. Sitting on the edge
of the bathtub, she compared it appreciatively with the one in the new house,
thinking that hers was nicer. Her towels, too, were of a higher quality. Hers? To
whom, in fact, did the towels, the tub—everything—belong? She was bothered
by the idea that the ownership of the nice new things was guaranteed by the
last  name  of  that  particular  individual  who  was  waiting  for  her  out  there.
Carracci’s possessions, she, too, was Carracci’s possession. Stefano knocked on
the door.
“What are you doing, do you feel all right?”
She didn’t answer.
Her husband waited a little and knocked again. When nothing happened, he
twisted the handle nervously and said in a tone of feigned amusement, “Do I
have to break down the door?”
Lila didn’t doubt that he would have been capable of it—the stranger who
waited for her outside was capable of anything. I, too, she thought, am capable
of anything. She undressed, she washed, she put on the nightgown, despising
herself for the care with which she had chosen it months earlier. Stefano—
purely a name that no longer coincided with the habits and affections of a few
hours earlier—was sitting on the edge of the bed in his pajamas and he jumped
to his feet as soon as she appeared.
“You took your time.”
“The time needed.”
“You look beautiful.”
“I’m very tired, I want to sleep.”
“We’ll sleep later.”
“Now. You on your side, I on mine.”
“O.K., come here.”
“I’m serious.”
“I am, too.”
Stefano uttered a little laugh, tried to take her by the hand. She drew back,
he darkened.
“What’s wrong with you?”
Lila hesitated. She sought the right expression, said softly, “I don’t want
you.”
Stefano shook his head uncertainly, as if the three words were in a foreign
language. He murmured that he had been waiting so long for that moment, day
and night. Please, he said, in a pleading tone, and, with an expression almost of
dejection, he pointed to his wine-colored pajama pants, and mumbled with a
crooked smile: See what happens to me just when I look at you. She looked
without wanting to and, with a spasm of disgust, averted her gaze.
At  that  point  Stefano  realized  that  she  was  about  to  lock  herself  in  the
bathroom again and with an animal leap he grabbed her by the waist, picked
her up, and threw her on the bed. What was happening. It was clear that he
didn’t want to understand. He thought they had made peace at the restaurant,
now he was wondering: Why is Lina behaving like this, she’s too young. In fact
he was laughing, on top of her, trying to soothe her.
“It’s a beautiful thing,” he said, “you mustn’t be afraid. I love you more than
my mother and my sister.”
But  no,  she  was  already  pulling  herself  up  to  get  away  from  him.  How
difficult it is to keep up with this girl: she says yes and means no, she says no
and means yes. Stefano muttered: No more of these whims, and he stopped her
again, sat astride her, pinned her wrists against the bedspread.
“You said that we should wait and we waited,” he said, “even though being
near you without touching you was terrible and I suffered. But we’re married
now—behave yourself, don’t worry.”
He leaned over to kiss her on the mouth, but she avoided him, turning her
face forcefully to right and left, struggling, twisting, as she repeated, “Leave
me alone, I don’t want you, I don’t want you, I don’t want you.”
At that point, almost against his will, the tone of Stefano’s voice rose: “Now
you’re really pissing me off, Lina.”
He  repeated  that  remark  two  or  three  times,  each  time  louder,  as  if  to
assimilate fully an order that was coming to him from very far away, perhaps
even from before he was born. The order was: be a man, Ste’; either you subdue
her now or you’ll never subdue her; your wife has to learn right away that she
is the female and you’re the male and therefore she has to obey. And Lila
hearing him—you’re pissing me off, you’re pissing me off, you’re pissing me off
—and seeing him, broad, heavy above her narrow pelvis, his sex erect, holding
up the material of his pajamas like a tent support, remembered when, years
before, he had wanted to grab her tongue with his fingers and prick it with a
pin because she had dared to humiliate Alfonso in a school competition. He was
never Stefano, she seemed to discover suddenly, he was always the oldest son
of Don Achille. And that thought, immediately, brought to the young face of
her husband, like a revival, features that until that moment had remained
prudently hidden in his blood but that had always been there, waiting for their
moment. Oh yes, to please the neighborhood, to please her, Stefano had striven
to be someone else, softening his features with courteousness, adapting his
gaze to meekness, modeling his voice on the tones of conciliation; his fingers,
his hands, his whole body had learned to restrain their force. But now the
limits that he had imposed for so long were about to give way, and Lila was
seized by a childish terror, greater than when we had gone down into the
cellar  to  get  our  dolls.  Don  Achille  was  rising  from  the  muck  of  the
neighborhood, feeding on the living matter of his son. The father was cracking
his skin, changing his gaze, exploding out of his body. And in fact look at him,
he tore the nightgown off her chest, bared her breasts, clasped her fiercely,
leaned over to bite her nipples. And when she, as she had always been able to
do, repressed her horror and tried to tear him off her by pulling his hair,
groping with her mouth as she sought to bite him until he bled, he drew back,
seized  her  arms,  pinned  them  under  his  huge  bent  legs,  said  to  her
contemptuously: What are you doing, be quiet, you’re just a twig, if I want to
break you I’ll break you. But Lila wouldn’t calm down, she bit the air, she
arched to get his weight off of her. In vain. He now had his hands free and
leaning over her he slapped her lightly with the tips of his fingers and kept
telling her, pressing her: see how big it is, eh, say yes, say yes, say yes, until he
took out of his pajamas his stubby sex that, extended over her, seemed like a
puppet without arms or legs, congested by mute stirrings, in a frenzy to uproot
itself from that other, bigger puppet that was saying, hoarsely, Now I’ll make
you feel it, Lina, look how nice it is, nobody’s got one like this. And since she
was still writhing, he hit her twice, first with the palm of his hand, then with
the back, and so hard that she understood that if she continued to resist he
would certainly kill her—or at least Don Achille would: who frightened the
neighborhood  because  you  knew  that  with  his  strength  he  could  hurl  you
against a wall or a tree—and she emptied herself of all rebellion, yielding to a
soundless terror, while he drew back, pulled up her nightgown, whispered in
her  ear:  you  don’t  realize  how  much  I  love  you,  but  you  will  know,  and
tomorrow it will be you asking me to love you as I am now, and more, in fact
you will go down on your knees and beg me, and I will say yes but only if you
are obedient, and you will be obedient.
When,  after  some  awkward  attempts,  he  tore  her  flesh  with  passionate
brutality, Lila was absent. The night, the room, the bed, his kisses, his hands on
her body, every sensation was absorbed by a single feeling: she hated Stefano
Carracci, she hated his strength, she hated his weight on her, she hated his
name and his surname.
8.
They  returned  to  the  neighborhood  four  days  later.  That  same  evening
Stefano invited his parents-in-law and his brother-in-law to the new house.
With a humbler expression than usual, he asked Fernando to tell Lila what had
happened with Silvio Solara. Fernando confirmed to his daughter, in unhappy,
disjointed sentences, Stefano’s version. As for Rino, Carracci asked him, right
afterward,  to  tell  why,  in  the  end,  they  had  made  the  mutual  but  painful
decision to give Marcello the shoes he insisted on. Rino, in the manner of a
man  who  knows  what’s  what,  declared  pompously:  There  are  situations  in
which  certain  choices  are  obligatory,  then  he  started  in  with  the  serious
trouble Pasquale, Antonio, and Enzo had got into when they beat up the Solara
brothers and wrecked their car.
“You know who was more at risk?” he said, leaning toward his sister and
raising  his  voice.  “Them,  your  friends,  those  knights  in  shining  armor.
Marcello recognized them and was convinced that you had sent them. Stefano
and I—what were we supposed to do? You wanted those three idiots to get a
beating a lot worse than the one they gave? You wanted to ruin them? And for
what, anyway? For a pair of size 43 shoes that your husband can’t wear because
they’re too narrow for him and when it rains the water gets in? We made
peace, and, since those shoes were so important to Marcello, we gave them to
him.”
Words: with them you can do and undo as you please. Lila had always been
good with words, but on that occasion, contrary to expectations, she didn’t
open her mouth. Relieved, Rino reminded her spitefully that it was she who,
ever since she was a child, had been harassing him, telling him they had to get
rich.  Then,  she  said,  laughing,  make  us  rich  without  complicating  our  life,
which is already too complicated.
At that point—a surprise for the mistress of the house, though certainly not
for the others—the doorbell rang, and Pinuccia, Alfonso, and their mother,
Maria, appeared, with a tray of pastries freshly made by Spagnuolo himself, the
Solaras’ pastry maker.
At first it seemed that they had come to celebrate the newlyweds’ return
from  their  honeymoon,  since  Stefano  passed  around  the  wedding  pictures,
which  he  had  just  picked  up  from  the  photographer  (for  the  movie,  he
explained, it would take a little longer). But it soon became clear that the
wedding of Stefano and Lila was already old news, the pastries were intended
to mark a new happy event: the engagement of Rino and Pinuccia. All the
tension was set aside. Rino replaced the violent tones of a few minutes earlier
with tender modulations in dialect, exaggerated pronouncements of love, the
wonderful  idea  of  having  the  engagement  party  right  away,  in  his  sister’s
lovely house. Then, with a theatrical gesture, he took a package out of his
pocket; the package, when it was unwrapped, revealed a dark rounded case;
and the case, when it was opened, revealed a diamond ring.
Lila noted that it wasn’t that different from the one she wore on her finger,
next to the wedding ring, and wondered where her brother had got the money.
There were hugs and kisses. There was a lot of talk of the future, speculation
about who would manage the Cerullo shoe store in Piazza dei Martiri when the
Solaras opened it, in the fall. Rino supposed that Pinuccia would manage it,
maybe by herself, maybe with Gigliola Spagnuolo, who was officially engaged
to Michele and so was making claims. The family reunion became livelier and
full of hope.
Lila remained standing most of the time, it hurt to sit down. No one, not
even her mother, who was silent during the entire visit, seemed to notice her
swollen, black right eye, the cut on her lower lip, the bruises on her arms.
9.
She was still in that state when, there on the stairs that led to the house of
her mother-in-law, I took off her glasses, unwound her scarf. The skin around
her eye had a yellowish color, and her lower lip was a purple stain with fiery
red stripes.
To her friends and relatives she said that she had fallen on the rocks in
Amalfi on a beautiful sunny morning, when she and her husband had taken a
boat to a beach just at the foot of a yellow wall. During the engagement lunch
for her brother and Pinuccia she had used, in telling that lie, a sarcastic tone
and they had all sarcastically believed her, especially the women, who knew
what had to be said when the men who loved them and whom they loved beat
them severely. Besides, there was no one in the neighborhood, especially of the
female sex, who did not think that she had needed a good thrashing for a long
time. So the beatings did not cause outrage, and in fact sympathy and respect
for Stefano increased—there was someone who knew how to be a man.
But when I saw her so battered, my heart leaped to my throat, I embraced
her. And when she said she hadn’t come to visit because she didn’t want me to
see her in that state, tears came to my eyes. The story of her honeymoon, as
the photonovels put it, although stripped down, almost cold, made me angry,
pained  me.  And  yet,  I  have  to  admit,  I  also  felt  a  tenuous  pleasure.  I  was
content to discover that Lila now needed help, maybe protection, and that
admission of fragility not toward the neighborhood but toward me moved me.
I  felt  that  the  distances  had  unexpectedly  gotten  shorter  again  and  I  was
tempted to tell her right away that I had decided to quit school, that school
was useless, that I didn’t have the right qualities. It seemed to me that the news
would comfort her.
But her mother-in-law looked out over the banister on the top floor and
called her. Lila ended her story with a few hurried sentences, she said that
Stefano had tricked her, that he was just like his father.
“You remember that Don Achille gave us money instead of the dolls?” she
asked.
“Yes.”
“We shouldn’t have taken it.”
“We bought Little Women.”
“We  were  wrong:  ever  since  that  moment  I’ve  been  wrong  about
everything.”
She  wasn’t  upset,  she  was  sad.  She  put  her  dark  glasses  back  on,  she
reknotted the scarf. I was pleased about that we (we shouldn’t have taken it, we
were wrong), but the abrupt transition to the I annoyed me: I have been wrong
about everything. We, I would have liked to correct her, always we, but I didn’t.
It seemed to me that she was trying to comprehend her new condition, and
that  she  urgently  needed  to  know  what  she  could  hold  on  to  in  order  to
confront it. Before starting up the flight of stairs she asked, “Would you like to
come and study at my house?”
“When?”
“This afternoon, tomorrow, every day.”
“Stefano will be annoyed.”
“If he is the master, I am the master’s wife.”
“I don’t know, Lila.”
“I’ll give you a room, I’ll shut you in.”
“What’s the point?”
She shrugged.
“To know that you’re there.”
I didn’t say yes or no. I went off, and wandered through the city as usual. Lila
was sure that I would never quit school. She had assigned me the role of the
friend with glasses and pimples, always bent over her books, smart in school,
and she couldn’t even imagine that I might change. But I didn’t want that role
anymore. It seemed to me that, thanks to the humiliation of the unpublished
article, I had thoroughly understood my inadequacy. Even though Nino was
born  and  had  grown  up  like  Lila  and  me  in  that  wretched  outlying
neighborhood, he was able to use school with intelligence, I was not. So stop
deluding myself, stop striving. Accept your lot, as Carmela, Ada, Gigliola, and,
in her way, Lila herself have long since done. I didn’t go to her house that
afternoon or the following ones, and I continued to skip school, tormenting
myself.
One  morning  I  went  wandering  not  far  from  the  school,  along  Via
Veterinaria, behind the Botanic Garden. I thought of the conversations I had
had recently with Antonio: he was hoping to avoid military service, as the son
of a widowed mother and the sole support of the family; he wanted to ask for a
raise in the shop, and also save so that he could take over the management of a
gas pump along the stradone; we would get married, I would help out at the
pump. The choice of a simple life, my mother would approve. I can’t always
please Lila, I said to myself. But how hard it was to erase from my mind the
ambitions  inspired  by  school.  At  the  time  when  classes  were  over,  I  went,
almost without intending it, to the neighborhood of the school, and walked
around there. I was afraid of being seen by the teachers, and yet, I realized, I
wished them to see me. I wanted to be either branded irremediably as a no
longer model student or recaptured by the rhythms of school and submit to
the obligation to go back.
The first groups of students appeared. I heard someone calling me, it was
Alfonso. He was waiting for Marisa, but she was late.
“Are you going together?” I asked, teasing.
“No, she’s the one who’s got a crush.”
“Liar.”
“You’re  the  liar,  telling  me  you  were  sick,  and  look  at  you,  you’re  fine.
Professor Galiani is always asking about you, I told her you had a bad fever.”
“I did, in fact.”
“Obviously.”
He was carrying his books, tied up with elastic, under his arm, his face was
strained by the tension of the hours of school. Did Alfonso also conceal Don
Achille, his father, in his breast, despite his delicate appearance? Is it possible
that  our  parents  never  die,  that  every  child  inevitably  conceals  them  in
himself? Would my mother truly emerge from me, with her limping gait, as my
destiny?
I asked him, “Did you see what your brother did to Lina?”
Alfonso was embarrassed. “Yes.”
“And you didn’t say anything to him?”
“You have to see what Lina did to him.”
“Would you be able to act the same way with Marisa?”
He laughed timidly. “No.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“Why?”
“Because I know you, because we talk, because we go to school together.”
At the moment, I didn’t understand: what did “I know you” mean, what did
“we talk” and “we go to school together” mean? I saw Marisa at the end of the
street, she was running because she was late.
“Your girlfriend’s coming,” I said.
He didn’t turn, he shrugged, he mumbled, “Come back to school, please.”
“I’m sick,” I repeated, and left.
I  didn’t  want  to  exchange  even  a  hello  with  Nino’s  sister,  any  sign  that
evoked him made me anxious. But Alfonso’s obscure words did me good, I
turned them over in my mind as I walked. He had said that because he knew
me, we talked to each other, we sat at the same desk, he would never impose
his authority on a possible wife by beating her. He had expressed himself with
a frank sincerity, he wasn’t afraid of attributing to me, even if in a confused
way,  the  capacity  to  influence  him,  a  male,  to  change  his  behavior.  I  was
grateful to him for that tangled message, which consoled me and set in motion
a reconciliation between me and myself. It doesn’t take much for a conviction
that has become fragile to weaken to the point of giving way. The next day I
forged my mother’s signature and returned to school. That evening, at the
ponds, clinging to Antonio to escape the cold, I promised him: I’ll finish the
school year and we’ll get married.
10.
But I had a hard time making up the ground I had lost, especially in science,
and I tried to reduce my meetings with Antonio so that I could concentrate on
my books. When I missed a date because I had to study, he became gloomy, he
asked me, in alarm, “Is something wrong?”
“I’ve got a lot of homework.”
“How is it that all of a sudden you’ve got more homework?”
“I’ve always had a lot.”
“Before you didn’t have any.”
“It was a coincidence.”
“What are you hiding from me, Lenù?”
“Nothing.”
“Do you still love me?”
I reassured him, but meanwhile the time moved quickly by us and I went
home angry at myself because I still had so much studying to do.
Antonio’s fixation was always the same: Sarratore’s son. He was afraid that I
would talk to him, even that I would see him. Naturally, to prevent him from
suffering, I concealed the fact that I ran into Nino entering school, coming out,
in the corridors. Nothing particular happened, at most we exchanged a nod of
greeting and went on our way: I could have talked to my boyfriend about it
without any problems if he had been a reasonable person. But Antonio was not
reasonable  and  in  truth  I  wasn’t,  either.  Although  Nino  gave  me  no
encouragement, a mere glimpse of him left me distracted during class. His
presence  a  few  classrooms  away—real,  alive,  better  educated  than  the
professors,  and  courageous,  and  disobedient—drained  meaning  from  the
teachers’ lectures, the pages of books, the plans for marriage, the gas pump on
the stradone.
Even  at  home  I  couldn’t  study.  Added  to  my  confusing  thoughts  about
Antonio,  about  Nino,  about  the  future  was  my  mother’s  irritability,  as  she
yelled at me to do this or that, and my siblings, who came one by one to have
me look at their homework. That permanent turmoil wasn’t new, I had always
studied in disorder. But the old determination that had allowed me to do my
best even in those conditions seemed to be used up, I couldn’t or didn’t want to
reconcile school with everyone’s needs anymore. So I would let the afternoon
go by helping my mother, correcting my sister’s and brothers’ exercises, and
studying little or not at all for myself. And if once I had sacrificed sleep to
books, now, since I was still exhausted and sleep seemed to me a respite, at
night I forgot about homework and went to bed.
And so I began to show up in class not only inattentive but unprepared, and I
lived in fear that the teachers would call on me. Which soon happened. Once,
in the same day, I got low marks in chemistry, art history, and philosophy, and
my nerves were so frayed that right after the last bad grade I burst into tears in
front of everyone. It was a terrible moment: I felt the horror and the pleasure
of losing myself, the fear and the pride in going off the rails.
As we were leaving school Alfonso told me that his sister-in-law had asked
him to tell me to go and see her. Go on, he urged me anxiously, surely you’ll
study better there than at your house. So that afternoon I made up my mind
and walked to the new neighborhood. But I didn’t go to Lila’s house to find a
solution to my problems with school, I took it for granted that we would talk
the whole time and that my situation as a former model student would get
even worse. I said to myself, rather: better to go off the rails talking to Lila than
in the midst of my mother’s yelling, the petulant demands of my siblings, the
yearnings for Nino, Antonio’s recriminations; at least I would learn something
about married life, a life that soon—I now assumed—would be mine.
Lila greeted me with obvious pleasure. Her eye was no longer swollen, her
lip was healing. She was nicely dressed, her hair was carefully combed, she
wore lipstick, yet she moved through the apartment as if her house were alien
to her and she herself felt like a visitor. The wedding presents were still piled
up near the door, the rooms had a smell of plaster and fresh paint mixed with
the  vaguely  alcoholic  scent  that  emanated  from  the  new  furniture  in  the
dining  room,  the  table,  the  sideboard  with  a  mirror  framed  by  dark-wood
foliage, the silver chest full of silver, the plates, glasses, and bottles of colored
liquors.
Lila made coffee: it was pleasant to sit with her in the spacious kitchen and
play at being ladies, as we had done as children in front of the cellar air vent.
It’s relaxing, I thought, I was wrong not to come sooner. I had a friend of my
age with her own house, full of opulent, orderly things. That friend, who had
nothing  to  do  all  day,  seemed  happy  for  my  company.  Although  we  had
changed and the changes were still occurring, the warmth between us endured
intact. Why, then, not give in to it? For the first time since her wedding day I
felt at ease.
“How’s it going with Stefano?” I asked.
“Fine.”
“You’ve cleared things up?”
She smiled in amusement.
“Yes, it’s all clear.”
“And so?”
“Disgusting.”
“The same as Amalfi?”
“Yes.”
“Did he beat you again?”
She touched her face.
“No, this is old stuff.”
“Then?”
“It’s the humiliation.”
“And you?”
“I do what he wants.”
I thought for a moment, I asked her, suggestively, “But at least when you
sleep together, isn’t it nice?”
She made a grimace of discomfort, became serious. She began to speak of
her husband with a sort of loathing acceptance. It wasn’t hostility, it wasn’t a
need for retaliation, it wasn’t even disgust, but a placid disdain, a contempt
that invested Stefano’s entire person like polluted water in the ground.
I  listened,  I  understood  and  I  didn’t  understand.  Long  ago  she  had
threatened Marcello with the shoemaker’s knife simply because he had dared
to grab my wrist and break the bracelet. From that point on, I was sure that if
Marcello had just brushed against her she would have killed him. But toward
Stefano, now, she showed no explicit aggression. Of course, the explanation
was simple: we had seen our fathers beat our mothers from childhood. We had
grown up thinking that a stranger must not even touch us, but that our father,
our boyfriend, and our husband could hit us when they liked, out of love, to
educate  us,  to  reeducate  us.  As  a  result,  since  Stefano  was  not  the  hateful
Marcello but the young man to whom she had declared her love, whom she
had married, and with whom she had decided to live forever, she assumed
complete responsibility for her choice. And yet it didn’t add up. In my eyes Lila
was Lila, not an ordinary girl of the neighborhood. Our mothers, after they
were slapped by their husbands, did not have that expression of calm disdain.
They despaired, they wept, they confronted their man sullenly, they criticized
him behind his back, and yet, more and less, they continued to respect him (my
mother, for example, plainly admired my father’s devious deals). Lila instead
displayed an acquiescence without respect.
I said, “I feel comfortable with Antonio, even though I don’t love him.”
And I hoped that, in accord with our old habits, she would be able to grasp in
that statement a series of hidden questions. Although I love Nino—I was saying
without saying it—I feel pleasantly excited just thinking of Antonio, of our
kisses, of holding and touching each other at the ponds. Love in my case is not
indispensable  to  pleasure,  nor  is  respect.  Is  it  possible,  therefore,  that  the
disgust, the humiliation begin afterward, when a man subdues you and violates
you at his pleasure solely because now you belong to him, love or not, respect
or  not?  What  happens  when  you’re  in  a  bed,  crushed  by  a  man?  She  had
experienced  that  and  I  would  have  liked  her  to  talk  about  it.  Instead  she
confined herself to saying, sarcastically, Better for you if you’re comfortable,
and she led me to a small room that looked out onto the railroad tracks. It was
a bare space, there was only a desk, a chair, a cot, nothing on the walls.
“Do you like it here?”
“Yes.”
“Then study.”
She left, closing the door behind her.
The room smelled of damp plaster more than the rest of the house. I looked
out  the  window,  I  would  have  preferred  to  go  on  talking.  But  it  was
immediately clear to me that Alfonso had told her about my absence from
school, maybe even about my bad grades, and that she wanted to restore to me
the wisdom she had always attributed to me, even at the cost of imposing it on
me. Better that way. I heard her moving through the house, making a phone
call. It struck me that she didn’t say Hello, it’s Lina, or, I don’t know, It’s Lina
Cerullo, but Hello, this is Signora Carracci. I sat down at the desk, opened my
history book, and forced myself to study.
11.
The close of the school year was inauspicious. The building that housed the
high school was crumbling, rain leaked into the classrooms, after one violent
storm a street nearby caved in. There followed a period when we went to
school on alternate days, homework began to count more than the normal
lessons, the teachers loaded it on to the point where it was unbearable. Despite
my mother’s protests, I got in the habit of going to Lila’s right after school.
I arrived at two in the afternoon, I dropped my books somewhere. She made
me  a  sandwich  with  prosciutto,  cheese,  salami—anything  I  wanted.  Such
abundance was never seen at my parents’ house: how good the smell of the
fresh bread was, and the taste of the fillings, especially the prosciutto, bright
red edged with white. I ate greedily and Lila made me coffee. After we’d had
some intense conversation, she closed me in the little room and seldom looked
in, except to bring me a snack and to eat or drink with me. Since I had no wish
to run into Stefano, who generally returned from the grocery around eight at
night, I always left right at seven.
I became familiar with the apartment, with its light, with the sounds that
came  from  the  railroad.  Every  space,  every  thing  was  new  and  clean,  but
especially the bathroom, which had a sink, a bidet, a bathtub. One afternoon
when I felt particularly lazy I asked Lila if I could have a bath, I who still
washed under the tap or in a copper tub. She said I could do what I wanted and
went to bring me towels. The water came out hot from the tap and I let it run. I
undressed, I sank in up to my neck.
That  warmth  was  an  unexpected  pleasure.  After  a  while  I  tried  out  the
numerous little bottles that crowded the corners of the tub: a steamy foam
arose, as if from my body, and almost overflowed. Ah, how many wonderful
things Lila possessed. It was no longer just a matter of a clean body, it was play,
it was abandon. I discovered the lipsticks, the makeup, the wide mirror that
reflected an image without deformities, the hair dryer. Afterward, my skin was
smoother  than  I  had  ever  felt  it,  and  my  hair  was  full,  luminous,  blonder.
Maybe the wealth we wanted as children is this, I thought: not strongboxes full
of diamonds and gold coins but a bathtub, to immerse yourself like this every
day,  to  eat  bread,  salami,  prosciutto,  to  have  a  lot  of  space  even  in  the
bathroom, to have a telephone, a pantry and icebox full of food, a photograph
in a silver frame on the sideboard that shows you in your wedding dress—to
have this entire house, with the kitchen, the bedroom, the dining room, the two
balconies, and the little room where I am studying, and where, even though
Lila hasn’t said so, soon, when it comes, a baby will sleep.
That evening I hurried to the ponds, I couldn’t wait for Antonio to caress me,
smell me, marvel, enjoy that luxurious cleanliness that highlighted beauty. It
was a gift that I wanted to give him. But he had his anxieties: he said, I’ll never
be able to offer you these things, and I answered, Who says that I want them,
and he replied, You always want to do what Lila does. I was offended, we
quarreled. I was independent. I did only what I liked, I did what he and Lila
didn’t and couldn’t do, I went to school, I studied hard, was going blind over
my books. I cried that he didn’t understand me, that all he did was disparage
and insult me, and I ran away.
But Antonio understood me too well. Day by day my friend’s house charmed
me more, it became a magical place where I could have everything, far from
the wretched gray of the old buildings where we had grown up, the flaking
walls, the scratched doors, the same objects always, dented and chipped. Lila
was careful not to disturb me, I would call out: I’m thirsty, I’m kind of hungry,
let’s  turn  on  the  television,  can  I  see  this,  can  I  see  that.  I  was  bored  by
studying, I struggled. Sometimes I asked her to listen to me while I repeated
the lessons aloud. She sat on the cot, I at the desk. I showed her the pages I had
to repeat, I recited, Lila checked me line for line.
It was on those occasions that I realized how her relationship with books
had  changed.  Now  she  was  intimidated  by  them.  She  no  longer  wanted  to
impose  on  me  an  order,  her  own  rhythm,  as  if  just  a  few  sentences  were
enough to get a picture of the whole and master it so that she could tell me:
This is the important concept, start here. When, following me in the textbook,
she had the impression that I was mistaken, she corrected me with a thousand
apologies, such as: Maybe I didn’t understand it, maybe you should check. She
seemed not to realize that her capacity to learn effortlessly remained intact.
But I knew. I saw, for example, that chemistry, so boring for me, provoked in
her that narrow look, and her few observations awakened me from my apathy,
excited me. I saw that after half a page of the philosophy textbook she was able
to  find  surprising  connections  between  Anaxagoras,  the  order  that  the
intellect imposes on the chaos of things, and Mendeleev’s tables. But more
often I had the impression that she was aware of the inadequacy of her tools, of
the naïveté of her observations, and she restrained herself on purpose. As soon
as she realized that she had let herself get too involved, she retreated as if
before a trap, and mumbled: Lucky you who understand, I don’t know what
you’re talking about.
Once,  she  closed  the  book  abruptly  and  said  with  annoyance,  “That’s
enough.”
“Why?”
“Because  I’ve  had  it,  it’s  always  the  same  story:  inside  something  small
there’s something even smaller that wants to leap out, and outside something
large there’s always something larger that wants to keep it a prisoner. I’m
going to cook.”
And yet I wasn’t studying anything that had to do in an obvious way with
the small and the large. Her own capacity to learn had irritated her, or perhaps
frightened her, and she had retreated.
Where?
To make dinner, to clean the house, to watch television with the volume low
in order not to disturb me, to look at the tracks, the train traffic, the fleeting
outline of Vesuvius, the streets of the new neighborhood, still without trees
and without shops, the rare car traffic, the women with their shopping bags,
small  children  attached  to  their  skirts.  Occasionally,  and  only  on  Stefano’s
orders, or because he asked her to go with him, she went out to the place—it
was less than five hundred meters from the house; once I went with her—
where the new grocery was to be built. There she took measurements with a
carpenter’s measuring tape to plan shelves and furnishings.
That was it, she had nothing else to do. I soon realized that, being married,
she was more alone than before. I sometimes went out with Carmela, with Ada,
even with Gigliola, and at school I had made friends with girls in my class and
other classes, so that sometimes I met them for ice cream on Via Foria. But she
saw only Pinuccia, her sister-in-law. As for the boys, if during the period of her
engagement  they  still  stopped  to  exchange  a  few  words,  now,  after  her
marriage, they gave a nod of greeting, at most, when they met on the street.
And yet she was beautiful and she dressed like the pictures in the women’s
magazines that she bought in great numbers. But the condition of wife had
enclosed  her  in  a  sort  of  glass  container,  like  a  sailboat  sailing  with  sails
unfurled  in  an  inaccessible  place,  without  the  sea.  Pasquale,  Enzo,  Antonio
himself would never have ventured onto the unshaded white streets of newly
built houses, to her doorway, to her apartment, to talk a little or invite her to
take a walk. And even the telephone, a black object attached to the kitchen
wall, seemed a useless ornament. The whole time I studied at her house, it
seldom rang and when it did it was usually Stefano, who had put one in the
grocery  as  well,  to  take  orders  from  customers.  Their  conversations  as
newlyweds were brief, she answered listlessly, yes, no.
She used the telephone mainly for making purchases. In that period she
hardly ever went out of the house, as she waited for the signs of the beating to
completely disappear from her face, but she bought things just the same. For
example, after my joyous bath, after my enthusiasm about the way my hair had
turned out, I heard her order a new hair dryer, and when it was delivered she
wanted to give it to me. She uttered that sort of magic formula (Hello, this is
Signora  Carracci)  and  then  she  negotiated,  discussed,  gave  up,  bought.  She
didn’t  pay,  the  shopkeepers  were  all  from  the  neighborhood,  they  knew
Stefano well. She merely signed, Lina Carracci, name and last name, as Maestra
Oliviero had taught us, and she wrote the signature as if it were an assignment,
with an intent half-smile, never even checking the merchandise, as if those
marks  on  paper  mattered  more  to  her  than  the  objects  that  were  being
delivered.
She also bought some big albums with green covers decorated with floral
motifs, in which she arranged the wedding photographs. She had printed just
for me copies of I don’t know how many of them, all the ones in which I, my
parents, my sister and brothers, even Antonio appeared. She telephoned and
ordered the photographs. I found one in which Nino could be seen: there was
Alfonso, there was Marisa, and he was at the right, cut off by the edge of the
frame, only his hair, his nose, his mouth.
“Can I have this, too?” I asked without much enthusiasm.
“You’re not in it.”
“I’m here, from the back.”
“All right, if you want it I’ll have it printed for you.”
I abruptly changed my mind.
“No, forget it.”
“Really, go ahead.”
“No.”
But the acquisition that most impressed me was the projector. The movie of
the wedding had finally been developed; the photographer came one night to
show it to the newlyweds and their relatives. Lila found out how much the
machine cost, she had one delivered to her house and invited me to watch the
film.  She  put  the  projector  on  the  dining-room  table,  took  a  painting  of  a
stormy sea off the wall, expertly inserted the film, lowered the blinds, and the
images began to flow over the white wall. It was a marvel: the movie was in
color, just a few minutes long. I was astonished. Again I saw her enter the
church on Fernando’s arm, come out into the church square with Stefano, their
happy walk through the Parco delle Rimembranze, ending with a long kiss, the
entrance into the restaurant, the dance that followed, the relatives eating or
dancing, the cutting of the cake, the handing out of the favors, the goodbyes
addressed to the lens, Stefano happy, she grim, both in their traveling clothes.
The first time I saw it I was struck most of all by myself. I appeared twice.
First in the church square, beside Antonio: I looked awkward, nervous, my face
taken up by my glasses. The second time, I was sitting at the table with Nino,
and  was  barely  recognizable:  I  was  laughing,  hands  and  arms  moved  with
casual elegance, I adjusted my hair, toyed with my mother’s bracelet—I seemed
to myself refined and beautiful.
Lila in fact exclaimed, “Look how well you came out.”
“Not really,” I lied.
“You look the way you do when you’re happy.”
The second time we watched (I said to her, Play it again, she didn’t have to
be asked twice), what struck me instead was the Solaras’ entrance into the
restaurant. The cameraman had caught the moment that had registered most
profoundly in me: the moment Nino left the room and Marcello and Michele
burst in. The two brothers entered side by side, in their dress clothes; they
were  tall  and  muscular,  thanks  to  the  time  they  spent  in  the  gym  lifting
weights; meanwhile Nino, slipping out, head lowered, just bumped Marcello’s
arm, and as Marcello abruptly turned, with a mean, bullying look, he vanished,
indifferent, without looking back.
The  contrast  seemed  violent.  It  wasn’t  so  much  the  poverty  of  Nino’s
clothes, which clashed with the opulence of the Solaras’, with the gold they
wore  on  their  necks  and  their  wrists  and  their  fingers.  It  wasn’t  even  his
extreme thinness, which was accentuated by his height—he was at least three
inches taller than the brothers, who were tall, too—and which suggested a
fragility opposed to the virile strength that Marcello and Michele displayed
with  smug  satisfaction.  Rather,  it  was  the  indifference.  While  the  Solaras’
arrogance could be considered normal, the haughty carelessness with which
Nino had bumped into Marcello and kept going was not at all normal. Even
those who detested the Solaras, like Pasquale, Enzo, or Antonio, had, one way
or another, to reckon with them. Nino, on the other hand, not only didn’t
apologize but didn’t so much as glance at Marcello.
The  scene  provided  documentary  proof  of  what  I  had  intuited  as  I  was
experiencing it in reality. In that sequence Sarratore’s son—who had grown up
in the run-down buildings of the old neighborhood just like us, and who had
seemed  so  frightened  when  it  came  to  defeating  Alfonso  in  the  school
competitions—now appeared completely outside the scale of values at whose
peak stood the Solaras. It was a hierarchy that visibly did not interest him, that
perhaps he no longer understood.
Looking at him, I was seduced. He seemed to me an ascetic prince who could
intimidate Michele and Marcello merely by means of a gaze that didn’t see
them. And for an instant I hoped that now, in the image, he would do what he
had not done in reality: take me away.
Lila noticed Nino only then, and said, curious, “Is that the same person you
sat with at the table with Alfonso?”
“Yes. Didn’t you recognize him? It’s Nino, the oldest son of Sarratore.”
“He’s the one who kissed you when you were on Ischia?”
“It was nothing.”
“Just as well.”
“Why just as well?”
“He’s a person who thinks he’s somebody.”
As if to excuse that impression I said, “This year he graduates and he’s the
best in the whole school.”
“You like him because of that?”
“No.”
“Forget him, Lenù, Antonio is better.”
“You think?”
“Yes. He’s skinny, ugly, and most of all really arrogant.”
I heard the three adjectives like an insult and was on the point of saying: it’s
not true, he’s handsome, his eyes sparkle, and I’m sorry you don’t realize it,
because a boy like that doesn’t exist in the movies or on television or even in
novels, and I’m happy that I’ve loved him since I was little, and even if he’s out
of my reach, even if I’m going to marry Antonio and spend my life pumping
gas, I will love him more than myself, I’ll love him forever.
Instead, unhappy again, I said, “I used to like him, in elementary school: I
don’t anymore.”
12.
The months that followed were packed with small events that tormented me
a great deal, and even today I find it difficult to put them in order. Although I
imposed on myself an appearance of self-assurance and an iron discipline, I
gave  in  continuously,  with  painful  pleasure,  to  waves  of  unhappiness.
Everything seemed to be against me. At school I couldn’t get the grades I used
to, even though I had begun to study again. The days passed without even a
moment during which I felt alive. The road to school, the one to Lila’s house,
the one to the ponds were colorless backdrops. Tense, discouraged, I ended up,
almost without realizing it, blaming Antonio for a good part of my troubles.
He, too, was very upset. He wanted to see me continuously, sometimes he
left  work  and  I  found  him  waiting  for  me,  self-conscious,  on  the  sidewalk
across from the school entrance. He was worried about the crazy behavior of
his mother, Melina, and was frightened by the possibility that he wouldn’t be
exempted from military service. He had submitted, in time, application after
application to the recruiting office documenting the death of his father, the
condition of his mother’s health, his role as the sole support of his family, and
it seemed that the Army, overwhelmed by the papers, had decided to forget
about  him.  But  now  he  had  learned  that  Enzo  Scanno  was  to  leave  in  the
autumn and he was afraid that his turn would come, too. “I can’t leave my
mother and Ada and the other children with no money and no protection,” he
said in despair.
One  day  he  appeared  at  school  out  of  breath:  he  had  learned  that  the
carabinieri had come to get information about him.
“Ask Lina,” he said anxiously, “ask her if Stefano had an exemption because
his mother is widowed or for some other reason.”
I soothed him, tried to distract him. I organized an evening for him at the
pizzeria  with  Pasquale  and  Enzo  and  their  girlfriends,  Ada  and  Carmela.  I
hoped that, seeing his friends, he would calm down, but it didn’t help. Enzo, as
usual, showed not the least emotion about his departure, he was sorry only
because, while he was in the Army, his father would have to go back to walking
the  streets  with  the  cart,  and  his  health  wasn’t  good.  As  for  Pasquale,  he
revealed somewhat morosely that he had been rejected for military service
because of an old tubercular infection. But he said that he regretted it, one
ought  to  be  a  soldier,  though  not  to  serve  the  country.  People  like  us,  he
muttered, have a duty to learn to use weapons, because soon the time will
come when those who should pay will pay. From there we went on to discuss
politics, or, to be exact, Pasquale did, and in a very intolerant way. He said that
the  Fascists  wanted  to  return  to  power  with  the  help  of  the  Christian
Democrats. He said that the police and the Army were on their side. He said
that we had to be prepared, and he spoke in particular to Enzo, who nodded
assent  and,  though  he  was  generally  silent,  said,  with  a  little  laugh,  don’t
worry, when I get back I’ll show you how to shoot.
Ada and Carmela appeared very impressed by that conversation, and pleased
to be the girlfriends of such dangerous men. I would have liked to speak, but I
knew little or nothing of alliances between Fascists, Christian Democrats, and
police, in my head I had not even a thought. Every so often I looked at Antonio,
hoping that he would get excited about the subject, but he didn’t, he just kept
trying to go back to what was torturing him. He asked over and over what it
was  like  in  the  Army,  and  Pasquale,  even  though  he  hadn’t  been  there,
answered: a real shithole, if you don’t knuckle under they break you. Enzo was
silent,  as  if  the  question  didn’t  concern  him.  Antonio,  on  the  other  hand,
stopped eating, and, playing with the pizza on his plate, kept saying things like:
They don’t know who they’re dealing with, let them just try, I’ll break them.
When we were alone he said to me, all of a sudden, in a depressed tone of
voice, “I know if I leave you won’t wait for me, you’ll go with someone else.”
At that point I understood. The problem wasn’t Melina, wasn’t Ada, wasn’t
his other brothers and sisters, who would be left without a means of support,
and it wasn’t even the harassments of Army life. The problem was me. He
didn’t want to leave me, even for a minute, and it seemed that no matter what I
said  or  did  to  reassure  him  he  wouldn’t  believe  me.  I  decided  to  take  the
offensive. I told him to follow the example of Enzo: He’s confident, I whispered,
if he has to go he goes, he doesn’t whine, even if he’s just gotten engaged to
Carmela. Whereas you’re complaining for no reason, yes, for no reason, Antò,
especially since you won’t go, because if Stefano Carracci got an exemption as
the son of a widowed mother, certainly you will, too.
That  slightly  aggressive,  slightly  affectionate  tone  eased  him.  But  before
saying goodbye he repeated, in embarrassment, “Ask your friend.”
“She’s your friend, too.”
“Yes, but you ask.”
The next day I talked to Lila about it, but she didn’t know anything about her
husband’s military service; reluctantly she promised that she would find out.
She didn’t do it immediately, as I’d hoped. There were constant tensions
with Stefano and with Stefano’s family. Maria had told her son that his wife
spent too much money. Pinuccia made trouble about the new grocery, she said
that she wasn’t going to be involved, if anyone it should be her sister-in-law.
Stefano silenced his mother and sister, but in the end he reproached his wife
for  her  excessive  spending,  and  tried  to  find  out  whether  she  might  if
necessary be willing to work in the new store.
Lila in that period became, even in my eyes, particularly evasive. She said
that  she  would  spend  less,  she  readily  agreed  to  work  in  the  grocery,  but
meanwhile she spent more than before and if previously she had stopped in at
the new shop out of curiosity or duty she no longer did even that. Now that the
bruises on her face were gone, she had an urgent desire to go out, especially in
the morning, when I was at school.
She would go for a walk with Pinuccia, and they vied to see who was better
dressed, who could buy more useless things. Usually Pina won, mainly because,
with a lot of coyly childish looks, she managed to get money from Rino, who
felt obliged to prove that he was more generous than his brother-in-law.
“I work all day,” said the fiancé to the fiancée. “Have fun for me, too.”
And proudly casual, in front of the workers and his father, he pulled out of
his  pants  pocket  a  crumpled  fistful  of  money,  offered  it  to  Pina,  and
immediately afterward made a teasing gesture of giving some to his sister, too.
His behavior irritated Lila, like a gust of wind that causes a door to slam and
knocks objects off a shelf. But she also saw signs that the shoe factory was
finally taking off, and all in all she was pleased that Cerullo shoes were now
displayed in many shops in the city, the spring models were selling well, the
reorders were increasing. As a result Stefano had taken over the basement
under the factory and had transformed it into a warehouse and workshop,
while Fernando and Rino had had to hire another assistant in a hurry and
sometimes even worked at night.
Naturally  there  were  disputes.  The  shoe  store  that  the  Solaras  had
undertaken  to  open  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri  had  to  be  furnished  at  Stefano’s
expense, and he, alarmed by the fact that no written contract had ever been
drawn up, squabbled a lot with Marcello and Michele. But now it seemed that
they were arriving at a private agreement that would set out in black and
white  the  figure  (slightly  inflated)  that  Carracci  intended  to  invest  in  the
furnishings. And Rino was very satisfied with the result: while his brother-in-
law put down the money, he acted like the boss, as if he had done it himself.
“If things continue like this, next year we’ll get married,” he promised his
fiancée, and one morning Pina decided to go to the same dressmaker who had
made Lila’s dress, just to look.
The dressmaker welcomed them cordially, then, since she was crazy about
Lila, asked her to describe the wedding in detail, and insisted on having a large
photograph of her in the wedding dress. Lila had one printed for her and she
and Pina went to give it to her.
As they were walking on the Rettifilo, Lila asked her sister-in-law how it
happened that Stefano hadn’t done his military service: if the carabinieri had
come to verify his status as the son of a widowed mother, if the exemption had
been communicated by mail from the recruiting office or if he had had to find
out in person.
Pinuccia looked at her ironically.
“Son of a widowed mother?”
“Yes, Antonio says that if you’re in that situation they don’t make you go.”
“I know that the only certain way not to go is to pay.”
“Pay whom?”
“The people in the recruiting office.”
“Stefano paid?”
“Yes, but you mustn’t tell anyone.”
“And how much did he pay?”
“I don’t know. The Solaras took care of everything.”
Lila froze.
“Meaning?”
“You  know,  don’t  you,  that  neither  Marcello  nor  Michele  served  in  the
Army. They got out of it owing to thoracic insufficiency.”
“Them? How is that possible?”
“Contacts.”
“And Stefano?”
“He went to the same contacts as Marcello and Michele. You pay and the
contacts do you a favor.”
That afternoon my friend reported everything to me, but it was as if she
didn’t grasp how bad the information was for Antonio. She was electrified—
yes, electrified—by the discovery that the alliance between her husband and
the Solaras did not originate in the obligations imposed by business but were
of long standing, preceding even their engagement.
“He deceived me from the start,” she repeated, with a kind of satisfaction, as
if  the  story  of  military  service  were  the  definitive  proof  of  Stefano’s  true
nature and now she felt somehow liberated. It took time before I was able to
ask her, “Do you think that if the recruiting office doesn’t give Antonio an
exemption the Solaras would do a favor for him, too?”
She gave me her mean look, as if I had said something hostile, and cut me
off: “Antonio would never go to the Solaras.”
13.
I did not report a single word of that conversation to my boyfriend. I avoided
meeting him, I told him I had too much homework and a lot of class oral exams
coming up.
It wasn’t an excuse, school was really hell. The local authority harassed the
principal,  the  principal  harassed  the  teachers,  the  teachers  harassed  the
students, the students tormented each other. A large number of us couldn’t
stand the load of homework, but we were glad that there was class on alternate
days. There was a minority, however, who were angry about the decrepit state
of the school building and the loss of class time, and who wanted an immediate
return to the normal schedule. At the head of this faction was Nino Sarratore,
and this was to further complicate my life.
I saw him whispering in the hall with Professor Galiani; I passed by hoping
that the professor would call me over. She didn’t. So then I hoped that he
would speak to me, but he didn’t, either. I felt disgraced. I’m not able to get the
grades I used to, I thought, and so in no time I’ve lost the little respect I had. On
the other hand—I thought bitterly—what do I expect? If Nino or Professor
Galiani asked my opinion on this business of the unused classrooms and too
much  homework,  what  would  I  say?  I  didn’t  have  opinions,  in  fact,  and  I
realized it when Nino appeared one morning with a typewritten sheet of paper
and asked abruptly, “Will you read it?”
My heart was beating so hard that I said only, “Now?”
“No, give it back to me after school.”
I was overwhelmed by my emotions. I ran to the bathroom and read in great
agitation. The page was full of figures and discussed things I knew nothing of:
plan  for  the  city,  school  construction,  the  Italian  constitution,  certain
fundamental articles. I understood only what I already knew, which was that
Nino was demanding an immediate return to the normal schedule of classes.
In class I showed the paper to Alfonso.
“Forget it,” he advised me, without even reading it. “We’re at the end of the
year, we’ve got final examinations, that would get you in trouble.”
But it was as if I had gone mad, my temples were pounding, my throat was
tight. No one else, in the school, exposed himself the way Nino did, without
fear of the teachers or the principal. Not only was he the best in every subject
but he knew things that were not taught, that no student, even a good one,
knew. And he had character. And he was handsome. I counted the hours, the
minutes, the seconds. I was in a hurry to give him back his page, to praise it, to
tell him that I agreed with everything, that I wanted to help him.
I didn’t see him on the stairs, in the crush of students, and in the street I
couldn’t find him. He was among the last to come out, and his expression was
more morose than usual. I went to meet him, cheerfully waving the paper, and
I poured out a profusion of words, all exaggerated. He listened to me frowning,
then he took the piece of paper, angrily crumpled it up, and threw it away.
“Galiani said it’s no good,” he mumbled.
I was confused.
“What’s no good about it?”
He scowled unhappily and made a gesture that meant forget about it, it’s not
worth talking about.
“Anyway, thank you,” he said in a somewhat forced manner, and suddenly
he leaned over and kissed me on the cheek.
Since the kiss on Ischia we had had no contact, not even a handshake, and
that way of parting, utterly unusual at the time, paralyzed me. He didn’t ask
me to walk a little distance with him, he didn’t say goodbye: everything ended
there. Without energy, without voice, I watched him walk away.
At that point two terrible things happened, one after the other. First, a girl
came out of a narrow street, a girl certainly younger than me, at most fifteen,
whose pure beauty was striking: she had a nice figure, and smooth black hair
that  hung  down  her  back;  every  gesture  or  movement  had  a  gracefulness,
every item of her spring outfit had a deliberate restraint. She met Nino, he put
an arm around her shoulders, she lifted her face, offering him her mouth, and
they  kissed:  a  kiss  very  different  from  the  one  he  had  given  me.  Right
afterward I realized that Antonio was at the corner. He was supposed to be at
work and instead he had come to get me. Who knew how long he had been
there.
14.
It was hard to convince him that what he had seen with his own eyes was
not what he had for a long time imagined but only a friendly gesture, with no
other purpose. “He’s already got a girlfriend,” I said, “you saw it yourself.” But
he must have caught a trace of suffering in those words, and he threatened me,
his lower lip and his hands began to tremble. Then I muttered that I was tired
of this, I wanted to leave him. He gave in, and we made up. But from that
moment on he trusted me even less, and the anxiety of departure for military
service was welded conclusively to the fear of leaving me to Nino. More and
more often he abandoned his job to be in time, he said, to meet me. In reality
his aim was to catch me in the act and prove, to himself above all, that I really
was unfaithful. What he would do then not even he knew.
One afternoon his sister Ada saw me passing the grocery, where she now
worked, to her great satisfaction and to Stefano’s. She ran out to see me. She
wore a greasy white smock that covered her to below the knees, but she was
still very pretty and it was clear from her lipstick, her made-up eyes, the pins
in her hair that, under the smock, she was dressed as if for a party. She said she
wanted to talk to me, and we agreed to meet in the courtyard before dinner.
She arrived breathless from the grocery, along with Pasquale, who had picked
her up.
They  spoke  to  me  together,  an  embarrassed  phrase  from  one,  an
embarrassed  phrase  from  the  other.  I  understood  that  they  were  worried:
Antonio lost his temper for no reason, he no longer had patience with Melina,
he was absent without warning from work. And even Gallese, the owner of the
shop, was upset, because he had known him since he was a boy and had never
seen him like this.
“He’s afraid of military service,” I said.
“So if they call him, of course he has to go,” Pasquale said, “otherwise he
becomes a deserter.”
“When you’re around, it all goes away,” said Ada.
“I don’t have much time,” I said.
“People are more important than school,” said Pasquale.
“Spend less time with Lina, and you’ll see, you’ll find the time,” said Ada.
“I do what I can,” I said, offended.
“His nerves are fragile,” Pasquale said.
Ada concluded abruptly, “I’ve been taking care of a crazy person since I was
a child—two would really be too much, Lenù.”
I was annoyed, and scared. Filled with a sense of guilt, I went back to seeing
Antonio often, even though I didn’t want to, even though I had to study. It
wasn’t enough. One night at the ponds he began to cry, he showed me a card.
He hadn’t received an exemption, he was to leave with Enzo, in the fall. And at
a certain point he did something extremely upsetting. He fell on the ground
and in a frenzy began sticking handfuls of dirt in his mouth. I had to hold him
tight, say that I loved him, wipe the dirt out of his mouth with my fingers.
What kind of mess am I getting myself into, I thought later, in bed, unable to
sleep,  and  I  discovered  that  suddenly  the  wish  to  leave  school—to  accept
myself for what I was, to marry him, to live at his mother’s house with his
siblings, pumping gas—had faded. I decided that I had to do something to help
him and, when he recovered, get myself out of that relationship.
The next day I went to Lila’s, really frightened. I found her overly cheerful;
during that period we were both unsettled. I told her about Antonio, and the
card, and I told her that I had made a decision: in secret from him, because he
would never give me permission, I intended to go to Marcello or even Michele
to ask if they could get him out of his predicament.
I was exaggerating my determination. In reality I was confused: on the one
hand  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  obliged  to  try,  since  I  was  the  cause  of
Antonio’s suffering; on the other, I was consulting Lila precisely because I took
it for granted that she would tell me not to. But I was so absorbed by my own
emotional chaos that I hadn’t taken into account hers.
Her reaction was equivocal. First she teased me, she said I was a liar, she said
I must really love my boyfriend if I was willing to go in person and humble
myself with the Solaras, even though I knew that, given all that had happened,
they  would  not  lift  a  finger  for  him.  Immediately  afterward,  however,  she
began nervously going in circles, she laughed, became serious, laughed again.
Finally she said: all right, go, let’s see what happens. And then she added:
“After all, Lenù, where’s the difference between my brother and Michele Solara
or, let’s say, between Stefano and Marcello?”
“What do you mean?”
“I mean that maybe I should have married Marcello.”
“I don’t understand you.”
“At least Marcello isn’t dependent on anyone, he does as he likes.”
“Are you serious?”
She quickly denied that she was, laughing, but she didn’t convince me. She
can’t possibly be reconsidering Marcello, I thought: all that laughter isn’t real,
it’s just a sign of ugly thoughts, of suffering because things aren’t going well
with her husband.
I had proof of that immediately. She became thoughtful, she narrowed her
eyes to cracks, she said, “I’m going with you.”
“Where.”
“To the Solaras.”
“To do what?”
“To see if they can help Antonio.”
“No.”
“Why?”
“You’ll make Stefano angry.”
“Who gives a damn. If he goes to them, I can, too, I’m his wife.”
15.
I couldn’t stop her. One Sunday—on Sundays Stefano slept until noon—we
were going out for a walk and she pressed me to go to the Bar Solara. When she
appeared on the new street, still white with lime, I was astonished. She was
extravagantly dressed and made up: she was neither the shabby Lila of long
ago nor the Jackie Kennedy of the glossy magazines but, based on the films we
liked, maybe Jennifer Jones in Duel in the Sun, maybe Ava Gardner in The Sun
Also Rises.
Walking next to her I felt embarrassment and also a sense of danger. It
seemed to me that she was risking not only gossip but ridicule, and that both
reflected on me, a sort of colorless but loyal puppy who served as her escort.
Everything about her—the hair, the earrings, the close-fitting blouse, the tight
skirt,  the  way  she  walked—was  unsuitable  for  the  gray  streets  of  the
neighborhood. Male gazes, at the sight of her, seemed to start, as if offended.
The  women,  especially  the  old  ones,  didn’t  limit  themselves  to  bewildered
expressions: some stopped on the edge of the sidewalk and stood watching her,
with a laugh that was both amused and uneasy, as when Melina did odd things
on the street.
And yet when we entered the Bar Solara, which was crowded with men
buying the Sunday pastries, there was only a respectful ogling, some polite
nods of greeting, the truly admiring gaze of Gigliola Spagnuolo behind the
counter, and a greeting from Michele, at the cash register—an exaggerated
hello that was like an exclamation of joy. The verbal exchanges that followed
were all in dialect, as if tension prevented any engagement with the laborious
filters of Italian pronunciation, vocabulary, syntax.
“What would you like?”
“A dozen pastries.”
Michele shouted at Gigliola, this time with a slight hint of sarcasm:
“Twelve pastries for Signora Carracci.”
At that name, the curtain that opened onto the bakery was pushed aside and
Marcello looked out. At the sight of Lila right there, in his bar and pastry shop,
he grew pale and retreated. But a few seconds later he came out again and
greeted her. He mumbled, to my friend, “It’s a shock to hear you called Signora
Carracci.”
“To  me,  too,”  Lila  said,  and  her  amused  half-smile,  her  total  absence  of
hostility, surprised not only me but the two brothers as well.
Michele examined her carefully, his head inclined to one side, as if he were
looking at a painting.
“We saw you,” he said, and called to Gigliola. “Right, Gigliò, didn’t we see her
yesterday afternoon?”
Gigliola nodded yes, unenthusiastically. And Marcello agreed—saw, yes saw—
but without Michele’s sarcasm, rather as if he had been hypnotized at a magic
show.
“Yesterday afternoon?” Lila asked.
“Yesterday afternoon,” Michele confirmed, “on the Rettifilo.”
Marcello came to the point, irritated by his brother’s tone of voice. “You
were on display in the dressmaker’s window—there’s a photograph of you in
your wedding dress.”
They talked a little about the photograph, Marcello with devotion, Michele
with irony, both asserting in different ways how perfectly it captured Lila’s
beauty  on  her  wedding  day.  She  seemed  annoyed,  but  playfully:  the
dressmaker hadn’t told her she would put the picture in the window, otherwise
she would never have given it to her.
“I want my picture in the window,” Gigliola cried from behind the counter,
imitating the petulant voice of a child.
“If someone marries you,” said Michele.
“You’re marrying me,” she replied darkly, and went on like that until Lila
said seriously:
“Lenuccia wants to get married, too.”
The attention of the Solara brothers shifted reluctantly to me; until then I
had felt invisible, and hadn’t said a word.
“No.” I blushed.
“Why not, I’d marry you, even if you are four-eyed,” said Michele, catching
another black look from Gigliola.
“Too late, she’s already engaged,” said Lila. And slowly she managed to lead
the two brothers around to Antonio, evoking his family situation, including a
vivid picture of how much worse it would be if he had to go into the Army. It
wasn’t just her skill with words that struck me, that I knew. What struck me
was a new tone, a shrewd dose of impudence and assurance. There she was, her
mouth flaming with lipstick. She made Marcello believe that she had put a seal
on the past, made Michele believe that his sly arrogance amused her. And, to
my great amazement, toward both she behaved like a woman who knows what
men are, who has nothing more to learn on the subject and in fact would have
much to teach: and she wasn’t playing a part, the way we had as girls, imitating
novels in which fallen ladies appeared; rather, it was clear that her knowledge
was true, and this did not embarrass her. Then abruptly she became aloof, she
sent out signals of refusal, I know you want me but I don’t want you. Thus she
retreated, throwing them off balance, so that Marcello became self-conscious
and  Michele  darkened,  irresolute,  with  a  hard  gaze  that  meant:  Watch  it,
because, Signora Carracci or not, I’m ready to slap you in the face, you whore.
At  that  point  she  changed  her  tone  again,  again  drew  them  toward  her,
appeared to be amused and amused them. The result? Michele didn’t commit
himself, but Marcello said: “Antonio doesn’t deserve it, but Lenuccia’s a good
girl, so to make her happy I can ask a friend and find out if something can be
done.”
I felt satisfied, I thanked him.
Lila chose the pastries, was friendly toward Gigliola and also toward her
father, the pastry maker, who poked his head out of the bakery to say: Hello to
Stefano. When she tried to pay, Marcello made a clear gesture of refusal, and
his brother, if less decisively, seconded him. We were about to leave when
Michele said to her seriously, in the slow tone he assumed when he wanted
something and ruled out any disagreement:
“You look great in that photograph.”
“Thank you.”
“The shoes are very conspicuous.”
“I don’t remember.”
“I remember and I want to ask you something.”
“You want a photo, too, you want to put it up here in the bar?”
Michele shook his head with a cold little laugh.
“No. But you know that we’re getting the shop ready in Piazza dei Martiri.”
“I don’t know anything about your affairs.”
“Well, you should find out, because our affairs are important and we all
know that you’re not stupid. I think that if that photograph is useful to the
dressmaker as an advertisement for a wedding dress, we can make much better
use of it as an advertisement for Cerullo shoes.”
Lila burst out laughing, she said, “You want to put that photograph in the
window in Piazza dei Martiri?”
“No, I want it enlarged, huge, in the shop.”
She thought about it for a moment, then made a gesture of indifference.
“Don’t ask me, ask Stefano, he’s the one who decides.”
I saw the brothers exchange a puzzled glance, and I understood that they
had already discussed the idea and had assumed that Lila would never agree, so
they  couldn’t  believe  that  she  hadn’t  been  indignant,  that  she  hadn’t
immediately said no, but had surrendered without argument to the authority
of her husband. They didn’t recognize her, and, right then, even I didn’t know
who she was.
Marcello went to the door with us. Outside, he became solemn, and said,
“This  is  the  first  time  in  a  long  while  that  we’ve  spoken,  Lina,  and  it’s
disturbing. You and I didn’t go with each other—all right, that’s the way it is.
But I don’t want anything between us to remain unclear. And especially I don’t
want blame that I don’t deserve. I know that your husband goes around saying
that as an insult I claimed those shoes. But I swear to you in front of Lenuccia:
he and your brother gave me the shoes to demonstrate that there was no more
bad feeling. I had nothing to do with it.”
Lila listened without interrupting, a sympathetic expression on her face.
Then,  as  soon  as  he  had  finished,  she  became  herself  again.  She  said  with
contempt, “You’re like children, accusing each other.”
“You don’t believe me?”
“No, Marcè, I believe you. But what you say, what they say, I don’t give a
damn about it anymore.”
16.
I dragged Lila into our old courtyard, I couldn’t wait to tell Antonio what I
had done for him. I confided to her, trembling with excitement: as soon as he
calms  down  a  little,  I’ll  leave  him,  but  she  had  no  comment,  she  seemed
distracted.
I  called.  Antonio  looked  out,  came  down,  serious.  He  said  hello  to  Lila,
apparently without noticing how she was dressed, how she was made up, in
fact trying to look at her as little as possible, maybe because he was afraid that
I would read in his face some male agitation. I told him that I couldn’t stay, I
had only time to give him some good news. He listened, but as I was speaking I
realized that he was pulling back as if before the point of a knife. He promised
he’ll help you, I said anyway, emphatically, enthusiastically, and asked Lila to
confirm it.
“Marcello said so, right?”
Lila  confined  herself  to  assenting.  But  Antonio  had  turned  very  pale,  he
lowered his eyes. He muttered, in a strangled voice: “I never asked you to talk
to the Solaras.”
Lila said right away, lying, “It was my idea.”
Antonio answered without looking at her. “Thank you, it wasn’t necessary.”
He said goodbye to her—said goodbye to her, not to me—turned his back,
and vanished into the doorway.
I felt sick to my stomach. Where was my mistake, why had he gotten angry
like that? On the street I exploded, saying to Lila that Antonio was worse than
his mother, Melina, the same unstable blood, I couldn’t take it anymore. She let
me speak and meanwhile wanted me go to her house with her. When we got
there, she asked me to come in.
“Stefano’s  there,”  I  objected,  but  that  wasn’t  the  reason.  I  was  upset  by
Antonio’s reaction and wanted to be alone, to figure out where I had made the
mistake.
“Five minutes and you can go.”
I went up. Stefano was in his pajamas, disheveled, unshaved. He greeted me
politely, glanced at his wife, at the package of pastries.
“You were at the Bar Solara?”
“Yes.”
“Dressed like that?”
“I don’t look nice?”
Stefano shook his head ill-humoredly, opened the package.
“Would you like a pastry, Lenù?”
“No, thank you, I have to go and eat.”
He bit into a pastry, turned to his wife. “Who did you see at the bar?”
“Your friends,” said Lila. “They paid me a lot of compliments. Isn’t that true,
Lenù?”
She recounted every word the Solaras had said to her, except the matter of
Antonio, that is to say the real reason we had gone to the bar, the reason that, I
thought, she had decided to go with me. Then she concluded, in a tone of
deliberate  satisfaction,  “Michele  wants  to  put  an  enlargement  of  the
photograph in the store in Piazza dei Martiri.”
“And you told him it was all right?”
“I told him they had to speak to you.”
Stefano finished the pastry in a single bite, then licked his fingers. He said, as
if  this  were  what  had  upset  him  most,  “See  what  you  force  me  to  do?
Tomorrow, because of you, I have to go and waste time with the dressmaker on
the Rettifilo.” He sighed, he turned to me: “Lenù, you who are a respectable
girl, try to explain to your friend that I have to work in this neighborhood, that
she shouldn’t make me look like a jerk. Have a good Sunday, and say hello to
Papa and Mamma for me.”
He went into the bathroom.
Lila behind his back made a teasing grimace, then went with me to the door.
“I’ll stay if you want,” I said.
“He’s a son of a bitch, don’t worry.”
She repeated, in a heavy male voice, words like try to explain to your friend, she
shouldn’t make me look like a jerk, and the caricature made her eyes light up.
“If he beats you?”
“What can beatings do to me? A little time goes by and I’m better than
before.”
On the landing she said again, again in a masculine voice: Lenù, I have to work
in this neighborhood, and then I felt obliged to do Antonio, I whispered, Thank
you, but there was no need, and suddenly it was as if we saw ourselves from the
outside, both of us in trouble with our men, standing there on the threshold,
actors in a recital of women, and we started laughing. I said: The minute we
move we’ve done something wrong, who can understand men, ah, how much
trouble they are. I hugged her warmly, and left. But I hadn’t even reached the
bottom of the stairs when I heard Stefano shouting odious curses. Now he had
the voice of an ogre, like his father’s.
17.
Already on the way home I began to worry both about her and about me. If
Stefano killed her? If Antonio killed me? I was racked by anxiety, I walked
quickly, in the dusty heat, along Sunday streets that were beginning to empty
as lunchtime approached. How difficult it was to find one’s way, how difficult it
was not to violate any of the incredibly detailed male regulations. Lila, perhaps
based  on  secret  calculations  of  her  own,  perhaps  only  out  of  spite,  had
humiliated her husband by going to flirt in front of everyone—she, Signora
Carracci—with her former wooer Marcello Solara. I, without intending to, in
fact convinced that I was doing good, had gone to argue the case of Antonio
with those who years before had insulted his sister, who had beaten him up,
whom  he  in  turn  had  beaten  up.  When  I  entered  the  courtyard,  I  heard
someone calling me, I started. It was him, he was at the window waiting for me
to return.
He came down and I was afraid. I thought: he must have a knife. Instead, the
whole time he spoke with his hands sunk in his pockets as if to keep them
prisoner, calmly, his gaze distant. He said that I had humiliated him in front of
the people he despised most in the world. He said I had made him look like
someone who sends his woman to ask a favor. He said that he would not go
down on his knees to anyone and that he would be a soldier not once but a
hundred times, that in fact he would die in the Army rather than go and kiss
the hand of Marcello Solara. He said that if Pasquale and Enzo should find out,
they would spit in his face. He said that he was leaving me, because he had had
the proof, finally, that I cared nothing about him and his feelings. He said that I
could say and do with the son of Sarratore what I liked, he never wanted to see
me again.
I couldn’t reply. Suddenly he took his hands out of his pockets, pulled me
inside  the  doorway  and  kissed  me,  pressing  his  lips  hard  against  mine,
searching my mouth desperately with his tongue. Then he pulled away, turned
his back, and left.
I went up the stairs in confusion. I thought that I was more fortunate than
Lila, Antonio wasn’t like Stefano. He would never hurt me, the only person he
could hurt was himself.
18.
I didn’t see Lila the next day, but, surprisingly, I was compelled to see her
husband.
That morning I had gone to school depressed: it was hot, I hadn’t studied, I
had scarcely slept. The school day had been a disaster. I had looked for Nino
outside, I would have liked to talk just a little, but I didn’t see him, maybe he
was wandering through the city with his girlfriend, maybe he was in one of the
movie theaters that were open in the morning, kissing her in the dark, maybe
he was in the woods at Capodimonte having her do to him the things I had
done  to  Antonio  for  months.  In  the  first  class  I  had  been  interrogated  in
chemistry and had given muddled or inadequate answers; who knows what
grade I had received, and there wasn’t time to make it up, I was in danger of
having to retake the exam in September. I had met Professor Galiani in the hall
and she had given me a gentle speech whose meaning was: What is happening
to you, Greco, why aren’t you studying anymore? And I had been unable to say
anything but: Professor, I am studying, I’m studying all the time, I swear; she
listened to me for a bit and then walked away and went into the teachers’
lounge.  I  had  had  a  long  cry  in  the  bathroom,  a  cry  of  self-pity  for  how
wretched my life was. I had lost everything: success in school; Antonio, whom I
had always wanted to leave, and who in the end had left me, and already I
missed  him;  Lila,  who  since  she  had  become  Signora  Carracci  was  more
removed every day. Worn out by a headache, I had walked home thinking of
her, of how she had used me—yes, used—to provoke the Solaras, to get revenge
on her husband, to show him to me in his misery as a wounded male, and the
whole way I wondered: Is it possible that a person can change like that, that
now there’s nothing to distinguish her from someone like Gigliola?
But at home there was a surprise. My mother didn’t attack me the way she
usually did because I was late and she suspected I had been seeing Antonio, or
because I had neglected one of the thousands of household tasks. She said to
me instead, with a sort of gentle annoyance, “Stefano asked me if you could go
with him this afternoon to the dressmaker’s on the Rettifilo.”
Befuddled by tiredness and discouragement, I thought I hadn’t understood.
Stefano? Stefano Carracci? He wanted me to go with him to the Rettifilo?
“Why doesn’t he go with his wife?” my father joked from the other room.
Formally he was taking a sick day but in reality he had to keep an eye on some
of his indecipherable deals. “How do those two pass the time? Do they play
cards?”
My mother made a gesture of annoyance. She said maybe Lila was busy, she
said we ought to be nice to the Carraccis, she said some people were never
satisfied with anything. In reality my father was more than satisfied: to have
good relations with the grocer meant that one could buy food on credit and
put  off  paying  indefinitely.  But  he  liked  to  be  witty.  Lately,  whenever  the
occasion  arose,  he  had  found  it  amusing  to  make  allusions  to  Stefano’s
presumed sexual laziness. At the table every so often he would ask: What’s
Carracci doing, he only likes television? And he laughed and it didn’t take
much to guess the meaning of his question: how is it that the two of them don’t
have any children, does Stefano function or not? My mother, who in those
matters  understood  him  immediately,  answered  seriously:  It’s  early,  leave
them alone, what do you expect? But in fact she enjoyed as much as or more
than he the idea that the grocer Carracci, in spite of the money he had, didn’t
function.
The table was already set; they were waiting for me. My father continued to
joke, with a half-sly expression, saying to my mother: “Have I ever said to you,
I’m sorry, tonight I’m tired, let’s play cards?”
“No, because you are not a respectable person.”
“And would you like me to become a respectable person?”
“A little, but don’t exaggerate.”
“So starting tonight I’ll be a respectable person like Stefano.”
“I said don’t exaggerate.”
How I hated those duets. They talked as if they were sure that my brothers
and sister and I couldn’t understand; or maybe they took it for granted that we
caught every nuance, but they considered that it was the proper way to teach
us how to be males and how to be females. Exhausted by my problems, I felt
like screaming—throw away the plate, run out, never see my family again, the
dampness in the corners of the ceiling, the flaking walls, the odor of food, any
of it. Antonio: how foolish I had been to lose him, I was already sorry, I wished
he would forgive me. If they make me retake the exams in September, I said to
myself, I won’t show up, I’ll fail, I’ll marry him right away. Then I thought of
Lila, how she had dressed, the tone she had taken with the Solaras, what she
had in mind, how spiteful humiliation and suffering were making her. My mind
wandered like that all afternoon, with disconnected thoughts. A bath in the tub
of  the  new  house,  anxiety  about  that  request  of  Stefano’s,  how  to  tell  my
friend, what her husband wanted from me. And chemistry. And Empedocles.
And  school.  And  quitting  school.  And  finally  a  cold  sadness.  There  was  no
escape. No, neither Lila nor I would ever become like the girl who had waited
for Nino after school. We both lacked something intangible but fundamental,
which was obvious in her even if you simply saw her from a distance, and
which one possessed or did not, because to have that thing it was not enough
to learn Latin or Greek or philosophy, nor was the money from groceries or
shoes of any use.
Stefano called from the courtyard. I hurried down and immediately saw in
his face an expression of despair. He said he wanted me to go with him to
retrieve the photograph that the dressmaker had displayed in her window
without permission. Do me this kindness, he muttered, in a sentimental tone of
voice. Then without a word he opened the door of the convertible, and we
drove off, assailed by the hot wind.
As soon as we were out of the neighborhood he started talking and he didn’t
stop  until  we  got  to  the  dressmaker’s.  He  spoke  in  a  mild  dialect,  without
cursing or joking. He began by saying that I must do him a favor, but he didn’t
immediately  explain  what  the  favor  was,  he  said  only,  stumbling  over  his
words, that if I did it for him, it would be as if I were doing it for my friend.
Then he went on to talk to me about Lila, how intelligent, how beautiful she
was. But she is rebellious by nature, he added, and either you do things the way
she says or she torments you. Lenù, you don’t know what I’m suffering, or
maybe you do know, but all you know is what she tells you. Now, listen to me,
too. Lina has a fixed idea that all I think about is money, and maybe it’s true,
but  I’m  doing  it  for  the  family,  for  her  brother,  for  her  father,  for  all  her
relatives. Am I wrong? You are very educated, tell me if I’m wrong. What does
she want from me—the poverty she comes from? Should only the Solaras make
money? Do we want to leave the neighborhood in their hands? If you tell me
I’m wrong, I won’t argue with you, I will immediately admit that I’m wrong.
But with her I have to argue whether I want to or not. She doesn’t want me,
she told me, she repeats it to me. Making her understand that I’m her husband
is a battle, and ever since I got married life has been unbearable. To see her in
the morning, in the evening, to sleep next to her and not be able to make her
feel how much I love her, with the strength I’m capable of, is a terrible thing.
I looked at his broad hands gripping the steering wheel, his face. With tears
in his eyes, he admitted that on their wedding night he had had to beat her,
that he had been forced to do it, that every morning, every evening she drew
slaps from his hands on purpose to humiliate him, forcing him to act in a way
that  he  never,  ever,  ever  would  have  wanted.  Here  he  assumed  an  almost
frightened tone: I had to beat her again, she shouldn’t have gone to the Solaras’
dressed like that. But she has a force inside that I can’t subdue. It’s an evil force
that makes good manners—everything—useless. A poison. You see she’s not
pregnant? Months pass and nothing happens. Relatives, friends, customers ask,
and you can see the mockery on their faces: any news? And I have to say, what
news, pretending not to understand. Because if I understood I would have to
answer. And what can I answer? There are things you know that can’t be said.
With that force she has, she murders the children inside, Lenù, and she does it
on purpose to make people think I don’t know how to be a man, to show me up
in front of everyone. What do you think? Am I exaggerating? You don’t know
what a favor you’re doing to listen to me.
I didn’t know what to say. I was stunned, I had never heard a man talk about
himself like that. The whole time, even when he spoke of his own brutality, he
used a dialect full of feeling, defenseless, like the language of certain songs. I
still don’t know why he behaved that way. Of course, afterward he revealed
what he wanted. He wanted me to ally myself with him for the good of Lila. He
said that she had to be helped to understand how necessary it was to behave
like a wife and not like an enemy. He asked me to persuade her to help out in
the second grocery and with the accounts. But for that purpose he didn’t have
to  confess  to  me  in  that  way.  Probably  he  thought  that  Lila  had  kept  me
minutely informed and therefore he had to give me his version of the facts. Or
maybe he hadn’t counted on opening himself up so frankly to his wife’s best
friend, and had done so only on the wave of emotion. Or he hypothesized that,
if  he  moved  me,  I  would  then  move  Lila  by  reporting  everything  to  her.
Certainly I listened to him with increasing sympathy. I was pleased by that free
flow of intimate confidences. But above all, I have to admit, what pleased me
was the importance he attached to me. When in his own words he articulated a
suspicion that I myself had always had, that is, that Lila harbored a force that
made  her  capable  of  anything,  even  of  keeping  her  body  from  conceiving
children, it seemed that he was attributing to me a beneficent power, one that
could win over Lila’s maleficent one, and this flattered me. We got out of the
car,  and  arrived  at  the  dressmaker’s  shop.  I  felt  consoled  by  that
acknowledgment. I went so far as to say pompously, in Italian, that I would do
everything possible to help them to be happy.
But  as  soon  as  we  were  in  front  of  the  dressmaker’s  window  I  became
nervous again. We both stopped to look at the framed photograph of Lila amid
fabrics of many colors. She was seated, her legs crossed, her wedding dress
pulled up a little to reveal her shoes, an ankle. She rested her chin on the palm
of one hand, her gaze was solemn, intense, turned boldly toward the lens, and
in her hair shone a crown of orange blossoms. The photographer had been
fortunate. I felt that he had caught the force Stefano had talked about; it was a
force—I seemed to grasp—against which not even Lila could prevail. I turned as
if to say to him, in admiration and at the same time dismay, here’s what we
were talking about, but he pushed open the door and let me go in first.
The tones he had used with me disappeared, and he was harsh with the
dressmaker.  He  said  that  he  was  Lina’s  husband,  he  used  that  precise
construction. He explained that he, too, was in business, but that it would
never occur to him to get publicity in that way. He went so far as to say: You
are  a  good-looking  woman,  what  would  your  husband  say  if  I  took  a
photograph of you and stuck it in amid the provolone and the salami? He asked
for the photograph back.
The dressmaker was bewildered; she tried to defend herself, and finally she
gave in. But she appeared very unhappy, and to demonstrate the effectiveness
of her initiative and the basis of her regret, she told three or four anecdotes
that later, over the years, became a small legend in the neighborhood. Among
those who had stopped in to ask for information about the young woman in
the  wedding  dress  during  the  period  in  which  the  photograph  was  in  the
window were the famous singer Renato Carosone, an Egyptian prince, Vittorio
De Sica, and a journalist from the paper Roma, who wanted to talk to Lila and
send a photographer to do a story on bathing suits like the ones worn at beauty
contests. The dressmaker swore that she had refused to give Lila’s address to
anyone, even though, especially in the case of Carosone and of De Sica, the
refusal had seemed to her very rude, given the status of those persons.
I noticed that the more the dressmaker talked the more Stefano softened
again. He became sociable, he wanted the woman to tell him in more detail
about those episodes. When we left, taking with us the photograph, his mood
had changed, and the monologue of the return did not have the anguished
tone of the earlier one. Stefano was cheerful, he began to speak of Lila with the
pride  of  someone  possessing  a  rare  object  whose  ownership  confers  great
prestige. Of course, he asked again for my help. And before leaving me at my
house  he  made  me  swear  over  and  over  that  I  would  try  to  make  Lila
understand  what  was  the  right  path  and  what  was  wrong.  Yet  Lila,  in  his
words,  was  no  longer  a  person  who  couldn’t  be  controlled  but  a  sort  of
precious fluid stored in a container that belonged to him. In the following days
Stefano told everyone, even in the grocery, about Carosone and De Sica, so that
the story spread and Lila’s mother, Nunzia, as long as she lived, went around
repeating to everyone that her daughter would have had the opportunity of
becoming a singer and actress, appearing in the film Marriage Italian Style, going
on television, even becoming an Egyptian princess, if the dressmaker of the
Rettifilo had not been so reticent and if fate had not let her marry, at the age of
sixteen, Stefano Carracci.
19.
The chemistry teacher was generous with me (or maybe it was Professor
Galiani who went to the trouble to get her to be generous), and gave me a pass.
I was promoted with average grades in literary subjects, low passing grades in
scientific ones, a narrow pass in religion and, for the first time, a less than
perfect  grade  in  behavior,  a  sign  that  the  priest  and  a  great  many  of  the
teachers had never really forgiven me. I was sorry about it; I felt that my old
dispute  with  the  religion  teacher  on  the  role  of  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been
presumptuous, and I regretted not having listened to Alfonso, who at the time
had tried to restrain me. Naturally I did not get a scholarship, and my mother
was  enraged,  saying  that  it  was  all  because  of  the  time  I  had  wasted  with
Antonio. Her words infuriated me. I said I didn’t want to go to school anymore.
She raised her hand to slap me, feared for my glasses, and hurried to get the
carpet beater. Terrible days, in other words, and they got worse. The only
thing that seemed positive was that, the morning I went to see the grades, the
janitor came up and handed me a package left by Professor Galiani. It was
books, but not novels: books full of arguments, a subtle sign of trust that still
was not enough to bring me relief.
I had too many worries and, whatever I did, the feeling of always being in
the wrong. I looked for my old boyfriend at home and at his job, but he always
managed to avoid me. I stuck my head in the grocery to ask Ada for help. She
treated me coldly, said that her brother didn’t want to see me anymore, and
from then on, if we met, she looked the other way. Now that there was no
school, waking up in the morning became traumatic, a kind of painful blow to
the head. At first I tried to read Professor Galiani’s books, but I was bored, I
could  scarcely  understand  them.  I  started  to  borrow  novels  from  the
circulating library, and read one after the other. But in the long run they didn’t
help. They presented intense lives, profound conversations, a phantom reality
more appealing than my real life. So, in order to feel as if I were not real, I
sometimes went all the way to school in the hope of seeing Nino, who was
taking the graduation exams. The day of the written Greek test I waited for
hours, patiently. But just as the first candidates began to emerge, with Rocci
under  their  arms,  the  pretty,  pure  girl  I  had  seen  raising  her  lips  to  him
appeared. She settled herself to wait not far from me, and in a second I was
imagining the two of us—models displayed in a catalogue—as we would appear
to the eyes of Sarratore’s son the moment he came out the door. I felt ugly,
shabby, and I left.
I went to Lila’s house in search of comfort. But I knew I had made a mistake
with her, too. I had done something stupid: I hadn’t told her about going with
Stefano to get the photograph. Why had I been silent? Was I pleased with the
role of peacemaker that her husband had proposed and did I think I could
exercise it better by being silent about the visit to the Rettifilo? Had I been
afraid of betraying Stefano’s confidence and as a result, without realizing it,
betrayed her? I didn’t know. Certainly it hadn’t been a real decision: rather, an
uncertainty that first became a feigned carelessness, then the conviction that
not having said right away what had happened made remedying the situation
complicated and perhaps vain. How easy it was to do wrong. I sought excuses
that might seem convincing to her, but I wasn’t able to make them even to
myself. I sensed that the foundations of my behavior were flawed, I was silent.
On the other hand, she had never indicated that she knew the encounter had
taken place. She always welcomed me kindly, let me take a bath in her bathtub,
use her makeup. But she made few comments on the plots of the novels that I
recounted to her, preferring to give me frivolous information about the lives of
actors and singers she read about in the magazines. And she no longer told me
any of her thoughts or secret plans. If I saw a bruise, if I took that as a starting
point to get her to examine the reasons for Stefano’s ugly reaction, if I said that
maybe he had been cruel because he would like her to help him, support him
in his difficulties, she looked at me ironically, she shrugged, she was evasive. In
a  short  time  I  understood  that  although  she  didn’t  want  to  break  off  her
relationship with me, she had decided not to confide in me anymore. Did she in
fact know, and no longer considered me a trustworthy friend? I even went so
far as to make my visits less frequent, hoping that she would feel my absence,
ask the reason for it, and we would explain things to each other. But she didn’t
seem to notice. Then I couldn’t stand it and went back to visiting constantly,
which seemed to make her neither happy nor unhappy.
That very hot day in July I was especially depressed when I arrived at her
house  and  yet  I  said  nothing  about  Nino,  about  Nino’s  girlfriend,  because
without intending to—it’s the way these things go—I had ended up reducing
the play of confidences almost to nothing myself. She was welcoming as usual.
She made an orzata. I curled up on the couch in the dining room to drink the
cold  almond  syrup,  irritated  by  the  clatter  of  the  trains,  by  the  sweat,  by
everything.
I observed her silently as she moved through the house; I was enraged by
her capacity to travel through the most depressing labyrinths, holding on to
the thread of her declaration of war without showing it. I thought of what her
husband had told me, his words about the power that Lila held back like the
spring of a dangerous device. I looked at her stomach and imagined that truly
inside it, every day, every night, she was fighting a battle to destroy the life
that  Stefano  wanted  to  insert  there  by  force.  How  long  will  she  resist,  I
wondered,  but  I  didn’t  dare  to  ask  explicit  questions,  I  knew  she  would
consider them disagreeable.
A little later Pinuccia arrived, apparently to visit her sister-in-law. But in
fact ten minutes afterward Rino showed up, and he and Pina began kissing,
practically right in front of us, in a way so excessive that Lila and I exchanged
looks. When Pina said she wanted to see the view, he followed her, and they
shut themselves in a room for a good half hour.
This happened often. Lila talked about it with a mixture of irritation and
sarcasm, and I was envious of the couple’s ease: no fear, no misery, when they
reappeared they were more contented than before. Rino went to the kitchen to
get something to eat; returning, he talked about shoes with his sister, he said
that things were constantly improving, and tried to get suggestions from her
that he could later take credit for with the Solaras.
“You know that Marcello and Michele want to put your picture in the store
in Piazza dei Martiri?” he asked suddenly, in an appealing tone.
“It doesn’t seem appropriate,” Pinuccia immediately interrupted.
“Why not?” Rino asked.
“What sort of question is that? If she wants, Lina can put the picture in the
new grocery: she’s going to run it, no? If I’m getting the shop in Piazza dei
Martiri, will you let me decide what goes in it?”
She  spoke  as  if  she  were  defending  Lila’s  rights  against  her  brother’s
intrusiveness. In fact, we all knew that she was defending herself and her own
future. She was tired of depending on Stefano, she wanted to quit the grocery
store, and she liked the idea of being the proprietor of a store in the center of
the city. So a small war had been going on for some time between Rino and
Michele, whose object was the management of the shoe store, a war inflamed
by pressure from their respective fiancées: Rino insisted that Pinuccia should
do it, Michele that Gigliola should. But Pinuccia was the more aggressive and
had no doubt that she would get the best of it; she knew that she could add the
authority of her brother to that of her fiancé. And so at every opportunity she
put on airs, like someone who has already made the leap, has left behind the
old neighborhood and now decrees what is suitable and what is not for the
sophisticated customers in the center.
I realized that Rino was afraid his sister would take the offensive, but Lila
displayed complete indifference. Then he checked his watch to let us all know
that he was very busy, and said in the tone of one who sees into the future, “In
my  opinion  that  photograph  has  great  commercial  possibilities.”  Then  he
kissed Pina, who immediately drew back, to signal disapproval, and left.
We  girls  remained.  Pinuccia,  hoping  to  use  my  authority  to  settle  the
question, asked me, sulkily, “Lenù, what do you think? Do you think the photo
of Lina should stay in Piazza dei Martiri?”
I said, in Italian, “It’s Stefano who should decide, and since he went to the
dressmaker purposely to get it removed from her window, I consider it out of
the question that he’ll give permission.”
Pinuccia glowed with satisfaction, and almost shouted, “My goodness, how
smart you are, Lenù.”
I waited for Lila to have her say. There was a long silence, then she spoke
just to me: “How much do you want to bet you’re wrong? Stefano will give his
permission.”
“No.”
“Yes.”
“What do you want to bet?”
“If you lose, you must never again pass with anything less than the best
grades.”
I looked at her in embarrassment. We hadn’t spoken about my difficulties, I
didn’t  even  think  she  knew,  but  she  was  well  informed  and  now  was
reproaching me. You weren’t up to it, she was saying, your grades fell. She
expected from me what she would have done in my place. She really wanted
me fixed in the role of someone who spends her life with books, while she had
money,  nice  clothes,  a  house,  television,  a  car,  took  everything,  granted
everything.
“And if you lose?” I asked, with a shade of bitterness.
That look of hers returned instantly, shot through dark slits.
“I’ll enroll in a private school, start studying again, and I swear I’ll get my
diploma along with you and do better than you.”
Along with you and do better than you. Was that what she had in mind? I felt as
if everything that was roiling inside me in that terrible time—Antonio, Nino,
the unhappiness with the nothing that was my life—had been sucked up by a
broad sigh.
“Are you serious?”
“When is a bet ever made as a joke?”
Pinuccia interrupted, aggressively.
“Lina, don’t start acting crazy the way you always do: you have the new
grocery  store,  Stefano  can’t  manage  it  alone.”  Immediately,  however,  she
controlled herself, adding with false sweetness, “Besides, I’d like to know when
you and Stefano are going to make me an aunt.”
She used that sweet-sounding formula but her tone seemed resentful to me,
and  I  felt  the  reasons  for  that  resentment  irritatingly  mixed  with  mine.
Pinuccia  meant:  you’re  married,  my  brother  gives  you  everything,  now  do
what you’re supposed to do. And in fact what’s the sense of being Signora
Carracci  if  you’re  going  to  shut  all  the  doors,  barricade  yourself,  obstruct,
guard a poisoned fury in your stomach? Is it possible that you must always do
harm,  Lila?  When  will  you  stop?  Will  your  energy  diminish,  will  you  be
distracted, will you finally collapse, like a sleepy sentinel? When will you grow
wide and sit at the cash register in the new neighborhood, with your stomach
swelling, and make Pinuccia an aunt, and me, me, leave me to go my own way?
“Who knows,” Lila answered, and her eyes grew large and deep again.
“Am I going to become a mamma first?” said her sister-in-law, smiling.
“If you’re always pasted to Rino like that, it’s possible.”
They had a little skirmish; I didn’t stay to listen.
20.
To placate my mother, I had to find a summer job. Naturally I went to the
stationer. She welcomed me the way you’d welcome a schoolteacher or the
doctor, she called her daughters, who were playing in the back of the shop, and
they  embraced  me,  kissed  me,  wanted  me  to  play  with  them.  When  I
mentioned that I was looking for a job, she said that she was ready to send her
daughters to the Sea Garden right away, without waiting for August, just so
that they could spend their days with a good, intelligent girl like me.
“Right away when?” I asked.
“Next week?”
“Wonderful.”
“I’ll give you a little more money than last year.”
That, finally, seemed to be good news. I went home satisfied, and my mood
didn’t change even  when my  mother said  that as  usual I  was lucky, going
swimming and sitting in the sun wasn’t a job.
Encouraged, the next day I went to see Maestra Oliviero. I was upset about
having to tell her that I hadn’t particularly distinguished myself in school that
year, but I needed to see her; I had to tactfully remind her to get me the books
for the next school year. And then I thought it would please her to know that
Lila, now that she had made a good marriage and had so much free time, might
start  studying  again.  Reading  in  her  eyes  the  reaction  to  that  would  help
soothe the unease it had provoked in me.
I knocked and knocked, the teacher didn’t come to the door. I asked the
neighbors, and around the neighborhood, and returned an hour later, but still
she didn’t answer. And yet no one had seen her go out, nor had I met her on
the streets or in the shops. Since she was a woman alone, old, and not well, I
went back to the neighbors. The woman who lived next door decided to ask
her son for help. The young man got into the apartment by climbing from the
balcony of his mother’s apartment into one of the teacher’s windows. He found
her on the kitchen floor, in her nightgown—she had fainted. The doctor was
called and he thought that she should be admitted to the hospital immediately.
They carried her downstairs. I saw her as she emerged from the entrance, in
disarray, her face swollen, she who always came to school carefully groomed.
Her eyes were frightened. I gave her a nod of greeting, and she lowered her
gaze. They settled her in a car that took off blasting its horn.
The heat that year must have had a cruel effect on frailer bodies. In the
afternoon  Melina’s  children  could  be  heard  in  the  courtyard  calling  their
mother in increasingly worried voices. When the cries didn’t stop, I went to see
what was happening and ran into Ada. She said anxiously, her eyes shiny with
tears, that Melina couldn’t be found. Right afterward Antonio arrived, out of
breath  and  pale;  he  didn’t  even  look  at  me  but  hurried  off.  Soon  half  the
neighborhood was looking for Melina, even Stefano, who, still in his grocer’s
smock, got in the convertible, with Ada beside him, and drove slowly along the
streets. I followed Antonio, and we ran here and there, without saying a word.
We ended up near the ponds, and made our way through the tall grass, calling
his mother. His cheeks were hollow, he had dark circles under his eyes. I took
his hand, wanting to be of comfort, but he repulsed me, with an odious phrase,
he said: Leave me alone, you’re no woman. I felt a sharp pain in my chest, but
just then we saw Melina. She was sitting in the water, cooling off. Her face and
neck were sticking out from the greenish surface, her hair was soaked, her eyes
red, her lips matted with leaves and mud. She was silent: she whose attacks of
madness had for ten years taken the form of shouting or singing.
We brought her home, Antonio supporting her on one side, I on the other.
People seemed relieved, called to her, she waved weakly. I saw Lila next to the
gate; isolated in her house in the new neighborhood, she must have heard the
news late, and hadn’t taken part in the search. I knew that she felt a strong
bond with Melina, but it struck me that, while everyone was showing signs of
sympathy, and here was Ada running toward her, crying mamma, followed by
Stefano—who had left the car in the middle of the stradone with the doors
open, and had the happy expression of someone who has had ugly thoughts
but now discovers that all is well—she stood apart with an expression that was
hard to describe. She seemed to be moved by the pitiful sight of the widow:
dirty, smiling faintly, her light clothes soaked and muddy, the outline of her
wasted body visible under the material, the feeble wave of greeting to friends
and acquaintances. But Lila also seemed to be wounded by it, and frightened, as
if she felt inside the same disruption. I nodded to her, but she didn’t respond. I
gave up Melina to her daughter, then, and tried to join Lila, I also wanted to tell
her about Maestra Oliviero, about the terrible thing Antonio had said to me.
But I couldn’t find her; she was gone.
21.
When I saw Lila again, I realized immediately that she felt bad and tended to
make me feel bad, too. We spent a morning at her house in an atmosphere that
seemed to be playful. In fact she insisted, with growing spitefulness, that I try
on all her clothes, even though they didn’t fit me. The game became torture.
She was taller and thinner; everything of hers that I put on made me look
ridiculous. But she wouldn’t admit it, she said all you need is an adjustment
here  or  there,  and  yet  her  mood  darkened  as  she  gazed  at  me,  as  if  my
appearance offended her.
At a certain point she exclaimed that’s enough: she looked as if she had seen
a ghost. Then she pulled herself together, and, assuming a frivolous tone, told
me  that  a  couple  of  nights  earlier  she  had  gone  to  have  ice  cream  with
Pasquale and Ada.
I was in my slip, helping her put the clothes back on the hangers.
“With Pasquale and Ada?”
“Yes.”
“And Stefano, too?”
“Just me.”
“Did they invite you?”
“No, I asked them.”
And,  as  though  she  wanted  to  surprise  me,  she  added  that  she  hadn’t
confined herself to that brief visit to the old world of her girlhood: the next
day she had gone to have a pizza with Enzo and Carmela.
“Also by yourself?”
“Yes.”
“And what does Stefano say?”
She made a grimace of indifference. “Being married doesn’t mean leading
the life of an old lady. If he wants to come with me, fine; if he’s too tired in the
evening, I go out by myself.”
“How was it?”
“I had fun.”
I hoped she couldn’t read the disappointment in my face. We saw each other
frequently, she could have said: Tonight I’m going out with Ada, Pasquale,
Enzo, Carmela, do you want to come? Instead she had said nothing, she had
arranged and managed those outings by herself, in secret, as if they had been
not our friends forever but only hers. And now she was telling me in detail,
with an air of satisfaction, everything they had said: Ada was worried, Melina
ate almost nothing and threw up whatever she did eat, Pasquale was anxious
about his mother, Giuseppina, who couldn’t sleep, felt a heaviness in her legs,
had palpitations, and when she returned from visiting her husband in prison
wept  inconsolably.  I  listened.  I  noticed  that,  more  than  usual,  she  had  an
involved way of talking. She chose emotionally charged words, she described
Melina Cappuccio and Giuseppina Peluso as if their bodies had seized hers,
imposing on it the same contracted or inflated forms, the same bad feelings. As
she spoke, she touched her face, her breast, her stomach, her hips as if they
were  no  longer  hers,  and  showed  that  she  knew  everything  about  those
women, down to the tiniest details, in order to prove that no one told me
anything but told her everything, or, worse, in order to make me feel that I was
wrapped in a fog, unable to see the suffering of the people around me. She
spoke of Giuseppina as if she had kept up with her, despite the vortex of her
engagement and marriage; she spoke of Melina as if the mother of Ada and
Antonio had always been in her mind and she were thoroughly familiar with
her  madness.  Then  she  went  on  to  enumerate  many  other  people  in  the
neighborhood, people whom I hardly knew but whose histories she seemed to
know, as if she had a sort of long-distance involvement in their lives. Finally
she announced: “I also had ice cream with Antonio.”
That name was a punch in the stomach.
“How is he?”
“Fine.”
“Did he say anything about me?”
“No, nothing.”
“When does he leave?”
“In September.”
“Marcello did nothing to help him.”
“It was predictable.”
Predictable?  If  it  was  predictable,  I  thought,  that  the  Solaras  would  do
nothing, why did you take me there? And why do you, who are married, now
want to see your friends again, like that, by yourself? And why did you have ice
cream with Antonio without telling me, knowing that he is my old boyfriend
and that though he doesn’t want to see me anymore I would like to see him? Do
you want revenge because I went driving with your husband and didn’t report
to you a word of what we said to each other? I dressed nervously, mumbled
that I had things to do, had to go.
“I have something else to tell you.”
In a serious voice she said that Rino, Marcello, and Michele had wanted
Stefano to go to Piazza dei Martiri to see how well the shop was coming along,
and  that  the  three  of  them,  amid  sacks  of  cement  and  cans  of  paint  and
brushes, had pointed out the wall opposite the entrance and told him they
were thinking of putting the enlargement of the photograph of her in her
wedding dress there. Stefano had listened, then he had answered that certainly
it would be a good advertisement for the shoes, but that it didn’t seem to him
suitable. The three had insisted, he had said no to Marcello, no to Michele, and
no to Rino as well. In other words I had won the bet: her husband had not
given in to the Solaras.
I said, making an effort to appear enthusiastic, “See? Always saying mean
things about poor Stefano. And instead I was right. Now you have to start
studying.”
“Wait.”
“Wait for what? A bet is a bet and you lost.”
“Wait,” Lila repeated.
My bad mood got worse. She doesn’t know what she wants, I thought. She’s
unhappy that she was wrong about her husband. Or, I don’t know, maybe I’m
exaggerating, maybe she appreciated Stefano’s refusal, but she expects a more
ferocious clash of men around her image, and she’s disappointed because the
Solaras weren’t insistent enough. I saw that she was lazily running a hand over
her hip and along one leg, like a caress of farewell, and in her eyes appeared for
a moment that mixture of suffering, fear, and disgust that I had noticed the
night of Melina’s disappearance. I thought: and if, instead, she secretly wants
her picture to be on display, enlarged, in the center of the city, and is sorry
that Michele didn’t succeed in forcing it on Stefano? Why not, she wants to be
first in everything, she’s made like that: the most beautiful, the most elegant,
the wealthiest. Then I said to myself: above all, the most intelligent. And at the
idea that Lila would really start studying again I felt a regret that discouraged
me. Of course she would make up for all the years of school she had missed. Of
course I would find her beside me, elbow to elbow, taking the high-school
graduation exam. And I realized that the prospect was intolerable. But it was
even more intolerable to discover that feeling in myself. I was ashamed and
immediately  started  telling  her  how  wonderful  it  would  be  if  we  studied
together again, and insisting that she should find out how to proceed. She
shrugged, so I said, “Now I really have to go.”
This time she didn’t stop me.
22.
As usual, once I was on the stairs I began to sympathize with her reasons, or
so it seemed to me: she was isolated in the new neighborhood, shut up in her
modern house, beaten by Stefano, engaged in some mysterious struggle with
her own body in order not to conceive children, envious of my success in
school to the point of indicating to me with that crazy bet that she would like
to study again. Besides, it was likely that she saw me as much freer than she
was. The breakup with Antonio, my troubles with school seemed like nonsense
compared to hers. Step by step, without realizing it, I felt driven to a grudging
support, then renewed admiration. Yes, it would be wonderful if she started
studying again. To return to the time of elementary school, when she was
always first and I second. To give meaning back to studying because she knew
how to give it meaning. To stay in her shadow and therefore feel strong and
secure. Yes, yes, yes. Start again.
At some point, on the way home, the mixture of suffering, fear, and disgust I
had seen in her face returned to my mind. Why. I thought back to the teacher’s
body in disarray, to Melina’s uncontrolled body. For no obvious reason, I began
to look closely at the women on the stradone. Suddenly it seemed to me that I
had lived with a sort of limited gaze: as if my focus had been only on us girls,
Ada, Gigliola, Carmela, Marisa, Pinuccia, Lila, me, my schoolmates, and I had
never  really  paid  attention  to  Melina’s  body,  Giuseppina  Pelusi’s,  Nunzia
Cerullo’s, Maria Carracci’s. The only woman’s body I had studied, with ever-
increasing  apprehension,  was  the  lame  body  of  my  mother,  and  I  had  felt
pressed,  threatened  by  that  image,  and  still  feared  that  it  would  suddenly
impose itself on mine. That day, instead, I saw clearly the mothers of the old
neighborhood. They were nervous, they were acquiescent. They were silent,
with tight lips and stooping shoulders, or they yelled terrible insults at the
children who harassed them. Extremely thin, with hollow eyes and cheeks, or
with broad behinds, swollen ankles, heavy chests, they lugged shopping bags
and small children who clung to their skirts and wanted to be picked up. And,
good  God,  they  were  ten,  at  most  twenty  years  older  than  me.  Yet  they
appeared to have lost those feminine qualities that were so important to us
girls  and  that  we  accentuated  with  clothes,  with  makeup.  They  had  been
consumed by the bodies of husbands, fathers, brothers, whom they ultimately
came to resemble, because of their labors or the arrival of old age, of illness.
When  did  that  transformation  begin?  With  housework?  With  pregnancies?
With beatings? Would Lila be misshapen like Nunzia? Would Fernando leap
from her delicate face, would her elegant walk become Rino’s, legs wide, arms
pushed out by his chest? And would my body, too, one day be ruined by the
emergence of not only my mother’s body but my father’s? And would all that I
was learning at school dissolve, would the neighborhood prevail again, the
cadences,  the  manners,  everything  be  confounded  in  a  black  mire,
Anaximander and my father, Folgóre and Don Achille, valences and the ponds,
aorists, Hesiod, and the insolent vulgar language of the Solaras, as, over the
millenniums, had happened to the chaotic, debased city itself?
I was suddenly sure that, without being aware of it, I had intercepted Lila’s
feelings and was adding them to mine. Why did she have that expression, that
ill humor? Had she caressed her leg, her hip, as a sort of farewell? Had she
touched herself, speaking, as if she felt the edges of her body besieged by
Melina, by Giuseppina, and was frightened, disgusted by it? Had she turned to
our friends out of a need to react?
I remembered how, as a child, she had looked at Maestra Oliviero when she
fell off the platform like a broken puppet. I remembered how she had looked at
Melina on the stradone, eating the soft soap she had just bought. I remembered
when she told the rest of us about the murder, and the blood on the copper
pot, and claimed that the killer of Don Achille was not a man but a woman, as
if, in the story she was telling us, she had heard and seen the form of a female
body break, from the need for hatred, the urgency for revenge or justice, and
lose its substance.
23.
Starting in the last week of July, I went with the stationer’s daughters to the
Sea Garden every day, including Sunday. Along with the thousand things that
the children might need, I brought in a canvas bag the books that Professor
Galiani had lent me. They were small volumes that examined the past, the
present, the world as it was and as it ought to become. The writing resembled
that of textbooks, but was more difficult and more interesting. I wasn’t used to
that sort of reading, and got tired quickly. Besides, the girls required a lot of
attention. And then there was the lazy sea, the leaden sun that bore down on
the gulf and the city, stray fantasies, desires, the ever-present wish to undo the
order of the lines—and, with it, every order that required an effort, a wait for
fulfillment  yet  to  come—and  yield,  instead,  to  what  was  within  reach,
immediately gained, the crude life of the creatures of the sky, the earth, and
the sea. I approached my seventeenth birthday with one eye on the daughters
of the stationer and one on Discourse on the Origins of Inequality.
One Sunday I felt someone putting fingers over my eyes and a female voice
asked, “Guess who?”
I recognized Marisa’s voice and hoped that she was with Nino. How I would
have liked him to see me made beautiful by the sun, the salt water, and intent
on reading a difficult book. I exclaimed happily, “Marisa!” and immediately
turned around. But Nino wasn’t there; it was Alfonso, with a blue towel over
his shoulder, cigarette, wallet, and lighter in his hand, a black bathing suit with
a white stripe, he himself pale as one who has never had a ray of sun in his
entire life.
I marveled at seeing them together. Alfonso had to retake exams in two
subjects in October, and, since he was busy in the grocery, I imagined that on
Sundays he studied. As for Marisa, I was sure that she would be at Barano with
her family. Instead she told me that her parents had quarreled with Nella the
year  before  and,  with  some  friends  from  Roma,  had  taken  a  small  villa  at
Castelvolturno. She had returned to Naples just for a few days: she needed
some school books—three subjects to do again—and, then, she had to see a
person. She smiled flirtatiously at Alfonso. The person was him.
I couldn’t contain myself, I asked right away how Nino had done on his
graduation exams. She made a face of disgust.
“All A’s and A-minuses. As soon as he found out the results he went off on
his own to England, without a lira. He says he’ll find a job there and stay until
he learns English.”
“Then?”
“Then I don’t know, maybe he’ll enroll in economy and business.”
I had a thousand other questions, I even looked for a way to ask who the girl
was who waited outside school, and if he had really gone alone or in fact with
her,  when  Alfonso  said,  embarrassed,  “Lina’s  here,  too.”  Then  he  added,
“Antonio brought us in the car.”
Antonio?
Alfonso must have noticed how my expression changed, the flush that was
spreading over my face, the jealous amazement in my eyes. He smiled, and said
quickly, “Stefano had some work to do about the counters in the new grocery
and couldn’t come. But Lina was extremely eager to see you, she has something
to tell you, and so she asked Antonio if he would take us.”
“Yes,  she  has  something  urgent  to  tell  you,”  Marisa  said  emphatically,
clapping her hands gleefully to let me know that she already knew the thing.
What thing? Judging from Marisa, it seemed good. Maybe Lila had soothed
Antonio and he wanted to be with me again. Maybe the Solaras had finally
roused their acquaintances at the recruiting office and Antonio didn’t have to
go. These hypotheses came to mind immediately. But when the two appeared I
eliminated both right away. Clearly Antonio was there only because obeying
Lila gave meaning to his empty Sunday, only because to be her friend seemed
to him a piece of luck and a necessity. But his expression was still unhappy, his
eyes frightened, and he greeted me coldly. I asked about his mother, but he
gave me scarcely any news. He looked around uneasily and immediately dived
into the water with the girls, who welcomed him warmly. As for Lila, she was
pale,  without  lipstick,  her  gaze  hostile.  She  didn’t  seem  to  have  anything
urgent to tell me. She sat on the concrete, picked up the book I was reading,
leafed through it without a word.
Marisa, in the face of those silences, became ill at ease; she tried to make a
show of enthusiasm for everything in the world, then she got flustered and
she, too, went to swim. Alfonso chose a place as far from us as possible and,
sitting motionless in the sun, concentrated on the bathers, as if the sight of
naked people going in and out of the water were utterly absorbing.
“Who gave you this book?” Lila asked.
“My professor of Latin and Greek.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
“I didn’t think it would interest you.”
“Do you know what is of interest to me and what isn’t?”
I immediately resorted to a conciliatory tone, but I also felt a need to brag.
“As soon as I finish I’ll lend it to you. These are books that the professor
gives the good students to read. Nino reads them, too.”
“Who is Nino?”
Did she do it on purpose? Did she pretend not even to remember his name in
order to diminish him in my eyes?
“The one in the wedding film, Marisa’s brother, Sarratore’s oldest son.”
“The ugly guy you like?”
“I told you that I don’t like him anymore. But he does great things.”
“What?”
“Now,  for  instance,  he’s  in  England.  He’s  working,  traveling,  learning  to
speak English.”
I was excited merely by summarizing Marisa’s words. I said to Lila, “Imagine
if  you  and  I  could  do  things  like  that.  Travel.  Work  as  waiters  to  support
ourselves. Learn to speak English better than the English. Why can he be free
to do that and we can’t?”
“Did he finish school?”
“Yes, he got his diploma. Afterward, though, he’s going to do a difficult
course at the university.”
“Is he smart?”
“As smart as you.”
“I don’t go to school.”
“Yes, but: you lost the bet and now you have to go back to books.”
“Stop it, Lenù.”
“Stefano won’t let you?”
“There’s the new grocery, I’m supposed to manage it.”
“You’ll study in the grocery.”
“No.”
“You promised. You said we’d get our diploma together.”
“No.”
“Why?”
Lila ran her hand back and forth over the cover of the book, ironing it.
“I’m pregnant,” she said. And without waiting for me to react she muttered,
“It’s so hot,” left the book, went to the edge of the concrete, hurled herself
without hesitation into the water, yelling at Antonio, who was playing and
splashing with Marisa and the children, “Tonì, save me!”
She flew for a few seconds, arms wide, then clumsily hit the surface of the
water. She didn’t know how to swim.
24.
In the days that followed, Lila started on a period of feverish activity. She
began with the new grocery, involving herself as if it were the most important
thing in the world. She woke up early, before Stefano. She threw up, made
coffee, threw up again. He had become very solicitous, he wanted to drive her,
but Lila refused, she said she wanted to walk, and she went out in the cool air
of the morning, before the heat exploded, along the deserted streets, past the
newly constructed buildings, most of them still empty, to the store that was
being fitted out. She pulled up the shutter, washed the paint-splattered floor,
waited for the workers and suppliers who were delivering scales, slicers, and
furnishings, gave orders on where to place them, moved things around herself,
trying out new, more efficient arrangements. Large threatening men, rough-
mannered  boys  were  ordered  about  and  submitted  to  her  whims  without
protesting. Since she had barely finished giving an order when she undertook
some other heavy job, they cried in apprehension: Signora Carracci, and did all
they could to help her.
Lila, in spite of the heat, which sapped her energy, did not confine herself to
the shop in the new neighborhood. Sometimes she went with her sister-in-law
to the small work site in Piazza dei Martiri, where Michele generally presided,
but often Rino, too, was there, feeling he had the right to monitor the work
both as the maker of Cerullo shoes and as the brother-in-law of Stefano, who
was the Solaras’ partner. Lila would not stay still in that space, either. She
inspected it, she climbed the workmen’s ladders, she observed the place from
high  up,  she  came  down,  she  began  to  move  things.  At  first  she  hurt
everybody’s feelings, but soon, one after the other, they reluctantly gave in.
Michele, although the most sarcastically hostile, seemed to grasp most readily
the advantages of Lila’s suggestions.
“Signó,” he said teasing, “come and rearrange the bar, too, I’ll pay you.”
Naturally she wouldn’t think of laying a hand on the Bar Solara, but when
she had brought enough disorder to Piazza dei Martiri she moved on to the
kingdom of the Carracci family, the old grocery, and installed herself there.
She  made  Stefano  keep  Alfonso  at  home  because  he  had  to  study  for  his
makeup exams, and urged Pinuccia to go out more and more often, with her
mother, to poke into the shop in Piazza dei Martiri. So, little by little, she
reorganized the two adjacent spaces in the old neighborhood to make the work
easier and more efficient. In a short time she demonstrated that both Maria
and Pinuccia were substantially superfluous; she gave Ada a bigger job, and got
Stefano to increase her pay.
When, in the late afternoon, I returned from the Sea Garden and delivered
the girls to the stationer, I almost always stopped at the grocery to see how Lila
was  doing,  if  her  stomach  had  started  to  swell.  She  was  nervous,  and  her
complexion wasn’t good. To cautious questions about her pregnancy she either
didn’t respond or dragged me outside the store and said nonsensical things
like: “I don’t want to talk about it, it’s a disease, I have an emptiness inside me
that weighs me down.” Then she started to tell me about the new grocery and
the old one, and Piazza dei Martiri, with her usual exhilarating delivery, just to
make  me  believe  that  these  were  places  where  marvelous  things  were
happening and I, poor me, was missing them.
But by now I knew her tricks, I listened but didn’t believe her, although I
always ended up hypnotized by the energy with which she played both servant
and mistress. Lila was able to talk to me, talk to the customers, talk to Ada, all
at the same time, while continuing to unwrap, cut, weigh, take money, and
give  change.  She  erased  herself  in  the  words  and  gestures,  she  became
exhausted, she seemed truly engaged in an unrelenting struggle to forget the
weight of what she still described, incongruously, as “an emptiness inside.”
What impressed me most, though, was her casual behavior with money. She
went to the cash register and took what she wanted. Money for her was that
drawer, the treasure chest of childhood that opened and offered its wealth. In
the (rare) case that the money in the drawer wasn’t enough, she had only to
glance at Stefano. He, who seemed to have reacquired the generous solicitude
of their engagement, pulled up his smock, dug in the back pocket of his pants,
took out a fat wallet, and asked, “How much do you need?” Lila made a sign
with her fingers, her husband reached out his right arm with the fist closed,
she extended her long, thin hand.
Ada, behind the counter, looked at her the way she looked at the movie stars
in the pages of magazines. I imagine that in that period Antonio’s sister felt as
if  she  were  living  in  a  fairy  tale.  Her  eyes  sparkled  when  Lila  opened  the
drawer and gave her money. She handed it out freely, as soon as her husband
turned his back. She gave Ada money for Antonio, who was going into the
Army,  she  gave  money  to  Pasquale,  who  urgently  needed  three  teeth
extracted. In early September she took me aside, too, and asked if I needed
money for books.
“What books?”
“The ones for school but also the ones not for school.”
I told her that Maestra Oliviero was still not out of the hospital, that I didn’t
know if she would help me get the textbooks, as usual, and here already Lila
wanted to stick the money in my pocket. I withdrew, I refused, I didn’t want to
seem a kind of poor relative forced to ask for money. I told her I had to wait till
school started, I told her that the stationer had extended the Sea Garden job
until  mid-September,  I  told  her  that  I  would  therefore  earn  more  than
expected and would manage by myself. She was sorry, she insisted that I come
to her if the teacher couldn’t help me out.
It wasn’t just me; certainly all of us, faced with that generosity of hers, had
some difficulties. Pasquale, for example, didn’t want to accept the money for
the dentist, he felt humiliated, and finally took it only because his face was
disfigured, his eye was inflamed, and the lettuce compresses were of no use.
Antonio, too, was offended, to the point where to take money that our friend
gave Ada in addition to her regular pay he had to be persuaded that it was
making up for the disgraceful pay that Stefano had given her before. We had
never had a lot of money, and we attached great importance even to ten lire; if
we found a coin on the street it was a celebration. So it seemed to us a mortal
sin that Lila handed out money as if it were a worthless metal, waste paper. She
did it silently, with an imperious gesture resembling those with which as a
child she had organized games, assigned parts. Afterward, she talked about
other things, as if that moment hadn’t existed. On the other hand—Pasquale
said to me one evening, in his obscure way—mortadella sells, so do shoes, and
Lina has always been our friend, she’s on our side, our ally, our companion.
She’s rich now, but by her own merit: yes, by her own merit, because the
money didn’t come to her from the fact that she is Signora Carracci, the future
mother of the grocer’s child, but because it’s she who invented Cerullo shoes,
and  even  if  no  one  seemed  to  remember  that  now,  we,  her  friends,
remembered.
All true. How many things Lila had made happen in the space of a few years.
And yet now that we were seventeen the substance of time no longer seemed
fluid but had assumed a gluelike consistency and churned around us like a
yellow cream in a confectioner’s machine. Lila herself confirmed this bitterly
when, one Sunday when the sea was smooth and the sky white, she appeared,
to my surprise, at the Sea Garden around three in the afternoon, by herself: a
truly unusual event. She had taken the subway, a couple of buses, and now was
here, in a bathing suit, with a greenish complexion and an outbreak of pimples
on her forehead. “Seventeen years of shit,” she said in dialect, with apparent
cheer, her eyes full of sarcasm.
She had quarreled with Stefano. In the daily exchanges with the Solaras the
truth  came  out  about  the  management  of  the  store  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri.
Michele  had  tried  to  insist  on  Gigliola,  had  harshly  threatened  Rino,  who
supported Pinuccia, had finally launched into a tense negotiation with Stefano,
in  which  they  had  come  close  to  blows.  And  in  the  end  what  happened?
Neither winners nor losers, it seemed. Gigliola and Pinuccia would manage the
store together. Provided that Stefano reconsider an old decision.
“What?” I asked.
“See if you can guess.”
I couldn’t guess. Michele had asked Stefano, in his teasing tone of voice, to
concede on the photograph of Lila in her wedding dress. And this time her
husband had done so.
“Really?”
“Really. I told you you just had to wait. They’re going to display me in the
shop. In the end I’ve won the bet, not you. Start studying—this year you’ll have
to get top marks.”
Here she changed her tone, became serious. She said that she hadn’t come
because of the photograph, since she had known for a long time that as far as
that shit was concerned she was merchandise to barter. She had come because
of the pregnancy. She talked about it for a long time, nervously, as if it were
something to be crushed in a mortar, and she did it with cold firmness. It has
no meaning, she said, not concealing her anguish. Men insert their thingy in
you and you become a box of flesh with a living doll inside. I’ve got it, it’s here,
and it’s repulsive to me. I throw up continuously, it’s my very stomach that
can’t bear it. I know I’m supposed to think beautiful things, I know I have to
resign myself, but I can’t do it, I see no reason for resignation and no beauty.
Besides the fact, she added, that I feel incapable of dealing with children. You,
yes, you are, just look how you take care of the stationer’s children. Not me, I
wasn’t born with that gift.
These words hurt me, what could I say?
“You don’t know if you have a gift or not, you have to try,” I sought to
reassure her, and pointed to the daughters of the stationer who were playing a
little distance away. “Sit with them for a while, talk to them.”
She laughed. She said maliciously that I had learned to use the sentimental
voice of our mothers. But then, uneasily, she ventured to say a few words to
the  girls,  retreated,  began  talking  to  me  again.  I  equivocated,  pressed  her,
urged her to take care of Linda, the smallest of the stationer’s daughters. I said
to her, “Go on, let her play her favorite game, drinking from the fountain next
to the bar or spraying the water by putting your thumb over it.”
She led Linda away unwillingly, holding her hand. Time passed and they
didn’t  come  back.  I  called  the  other  two  girls  and  went  to  see  what  was
happening. Everything was fine, Lila had been happily made a prisoner by
Linda. She held the child suspended over the jet, letting her drink or spray
water. They were both laughing, and their laughter sounded like cries of joy.
I was relieved. I left Linda’s sisters with her, too, and went to sit at the bar, in
a place where I could keep an eye on all four and also read. She’ll become that,
I thought, looking at her. What seemed insupportable before is cheering her up
now.  Maybe  I  should  tell  her  that  things  without  meaning  are  the  most
beautiful  ones.  It’s  a  good  sentence,  she’ll  like  it.  Lucky  her,  she’s  got
everything that counts.
For a while I tried to follow, line by line, the arguments of Rousseau. Then I
looked up, I saw that something was wrong. Shouts. Maybe Linda had leaned
over too far, maybe one of her sisters had given her a shove, certainly she had
escaped Lila’s grasp and had hit her chin on the edge of the basin. I ran over in
fear. Lila, as soon as she saw me, cried immediately, in a childish voice that I
had never heard from her, not even when she was a child:
“It was her sister who made her fall, not me.”
She was holding Linda, who was bleeding, screaming, crying, as her sisters
looked elsewhere with small nervous movements and tight smiles, as if the
thing had nothing to do with them, as if they couldn’t hear, couldn’t see.
I  tore  the  child  from  Lila’s  arms  and  tilted  her  toward  the  jet  of  water,
washing her face with resentful hands. There was a horizontal cut under her
chin.  I’ll  lose  the  money  from  the  stationer,  I  thought,  my  mother  will  be
angry. Meanwhile I ran for the attendant, who somehow cajoled Linda into
calming down, surprised her with an inundation of rubbing alcohol, making
her shriek again, then stuck a gauze bandage on her chin and went back to
soothing her. Nothing serious, in other words. I bought ice cream for the three
girls and went back to the concrete platform.
Lila had left.
25.
The stationer didn’t seem especially upset by Linda’s wound, but when I
asked if I should come the next day at the usual time to pick up the girls, she
said that her daughters had had too much swimming that summer and there
was no need for me anymore.
I didn’t tell Lila that I had lost my job. She on the other hand never asked me
how things had turned out, she didn’t even ask about Linda and her cut. When
I saw her again she was extremely busy with the opening of the new grocery
store and gave me the impression of an athlete in training, jumping rope more
and more frantically.
She dragged me to the printer, from whom she had ordered a large number
of flyers announcing the opening of the new store. She wanted me to go to the
priest to set a time to come by for the blessing of the place and the stock. She
announced that she had hired Carmela Peluso, at a salary a lot higher than
what she was making at the notions store, but first of all she told me that in
everything,  truly  everything,  she  was  waging  a  serious  war  against  her
husband,  Pinuccia,  her  mother-in-law,  her  brother  Rino.  She  didn’t  seem
especially aggressive, however. She spoke in a low voice, in dialect, doing a
thousand other things that seemed more important than what she was saying.
She enumerated the wrongs that her relatives, by marriage and by birth, had
done and were doing to her. “They have placated Michele,” she said, “just as
they placated Marcello. They used me—to them I’m not a person but a thing.
Let’s give him Lina, let’s stick her on a wall, since she’s a zero, an absolute
zero.” As she spoke her eyes shone, full of movement, within dark circles, her
skin  was  stretched  over  the  cheekbones,  her  teeth  flashed  white,  in  quick
nervous smiles. But she didn’t convince me. It seemed to me that behind that
raucous activity was a person who was exhausted and looking for a way out.
“What do you intend to do?” I asked.
“Nothing. All I know is they’ll have to kill me to do what they want with my
photograph.”
“Forget it, Lila. Ultimately it’s a nice thing, think about it: they only put
actresses on billboards.”
“And am I an actress?”
“No.”
“So? If my husband has decided to sell himself to the Solaras, do you think
he can sell me as well?”
I tried to soothe her, I was afraid that Stefano would lose patience and hit
her. I said so, she started laughing: since she’d been pregnant her husband
hadn’t dared to give her even a slap. But now, just as she uttered that remark,
the suspicion dawned on me that the photograph was an excuse, that really
she wanted to infuriate all of them, to be massacred by Stefano, by the Solaras,
by Rino, provoke them to the point where their blows would help her to crush
the impatience, the pain, the living thing she had in her belly.
My hypothesis found support the night the grocery opened. She seemed to
be wearing her shabbiest clothes. In front of everyone she treated her husband
like a servant. She sent away the priest she had had me call on before he could
bless the store, contemptuously sticking some money in his hand. She went on
to slice prosciutto and stuff sandwiches, handing them out free to anyone,
along with a glass of wine. And this last move was so successful that the store
had scarcely opened when it was jammed with customers; she and Carmela
were besieged, and Stefano, who was elegantly dressed, had to help them deal
with the situation as he was, without an apron, so that his good clothes got all
greasy.
When they came home, exhausted, her husband made a scene and Lila did
her best to provoke his fury. She shouted that if he wanted someone who
obeyed, and that’s all, he was out of luck; she was not his mother or his sister,
she would always make life difficult for him. And she started with the Solaras,
with the business of the photograph, insulting him grossly. First he let her
have her say, then he responded with even worse insults. But he didn’t beat
her. When, the next day, she told me what had happened, I said that although
Stefano had his faults, certainly he loved her. She denied it. “He understands
only this,” she replied, rubbing together thumb and index finger. And in fact
the grocery was already popular throughout the new neighborhood, and was
crowded from the moment it opened. “The cash drawer is already full. Thanks
to me. I bring him wealth, a son, what more does he want?”
“What more do you want?” I asked, with a stab of rage that surprised me,
and immediately I smiled, hoping she hadn’t noticed.
I remember that she looked bewildered; she touched her forehead with her
fingers. Maybe she didn’t even know what she wanted, she felt only that she
couldn’t find peace.
As the other opening, that of the shop on Piazza dei Martiri, approached, she
became unbearable. But maybe that adjective is excessive. Let’s say that she
poured out onto all of us, even me, the confusion that she felt inside. On the
one hand, she made Stefano’s life hell, she squabbled with her mother-in-law
and her sister-in-law, she went to Rino and quarreled with him in front of the
workers and Fernando, who, more hunched than usual, labored over his bench,
pretending  not  to  hear;  on  the  other,  she  herself  perceived  that  she  was
spinning around in her unhappiness, unresigned, and at times I caught her in
the new grocery store, in a rare moment when it was empty or she wasn’t
dealing with suppliers, with a vacant look, one hand on her forehead, in her
hair, as if to stanch a wound, and the expression of someone who is trying to
catch her breath.
One afternoon I was at home; it was still very hot, although it was the end of
September. School was about to begin, I felt at the mercy of the days. My
mother reproached me for wasting time. Nino—who knows where he was, in
England or in that mysterious space that was the university. I no longer had
Antonio, or even the hope of getting back together with him; he had left, along
with Enzo Scanno, for his military service, saying goodbye to everyone except
me. I heard someone calling me from the street. It was Lila. Her eyes were
shining, as if she had a fever, and she said she had found a solution.
“Solution to what?”
“The photograph. If they want to display it, they have to do it the way I say.”
“And what do you say?”
She didn’t tell me, maybe at that moment it wasn’t clear to her. But I knew
what sort of person she was, and I recognized in her face the expression she
got when, from the dark depths of herself, a signal arrived that fired her brain.
She asked me to go with her that evening to Piazza dei Martiri. There we would
find the Solaras, Gigliola, Pinuccia, her brother. She wanted me to help her,
support her, and I realized that what she had in mind would ferry her beyond
her  permanent  war:  a  violent  but  conclusive  outlet  for  the  accumulated
tensions; or a way of freeing her head, her body, from pent-up energies.
“All right,” I said, “but promise not to be crazy.”
“Yes.”
After the stores closed she and Stefano came to get me in the car. From the
few words they exchanged I understood that not even her husband knew what
she had in mind and that this time my presence, rather than reassuring him,
alarmed him. Lila had finally appeared to be accommodating. She had told him
that, if there was no possibility of abandoning the photograph, she wanted at
least to have her say on how it was displayed.
“A question of frame, wall, lighting?” he had asked.
“I have to see.”
“But then that’s it, Lina.”
“Yes, that’s it.”
It was a beautiful warm evening; the brilliant lights of the shop’s interior
spread their glow into the square. The gigantic image of Lila in her wedding
dress  could  be  seen  at  a  distance,  leaning  against  the  center  wall.  Stefano
parked,  we  went  in,  making  our  way  among  the  boxes  of  shoes,  piled  up
haphazardly, cans of paint, ladders. Marcello, Rino, Gigliola, and Pinuccia were
visibly irritated: for varying reasons they had no wish to submit yet again to
Lila’s caprices. The only one who greeted us cordially was Michele, who turned
to my friend with a mocking laugh.
“Lovely signora, will you let us know, at last, what you have in mind or do
you just want to ruin the evening?”
Lila looked at the panel leaning against the wall, asked them to lay it on the
floor. Marcello said cautiously, with the dark timidity that he always showed
toward Lila, “What for?”
“I’ll show you.”
Rino interrupted: “Don’t be an idiot, Lina. You know how much this thing
cost? If you ruin it, you’re in trouble.”
The Solaras laid the image on the floor. Lila looked around, with her brow
furrowed, her eyes narrowed. She was looking for something that she knew
was there, that perhaps she had bought herself. In a corner she spied a roll of
black paper, and she took a pair of big scissors and a box of drawing pins from
a shelf. Then, with that expression of extreme concentration which enabled
her to isolate herself from everything around her, she went back to the panel.
Before our astonished and, in the cases of some, openly hostile eyes, she cut
strips of black paper, with the manual precision she had always possessed, and
pinned them here and there to the photograph, asking for my help with slight
gestures or quick glances.
I joined in with the devotion that I had felt ever since we were children.
Those moments were thrilling, it was a pleasure to be beside her, slipping
inside her intentions, to the point of anticipating her. I felt that she was seeing
something that wasn’t there, and that she was struggling to make us see it, too.
I  was  suddenly  happy,  feeling  the  intensity  that  invested  her,  that  flowed
through her fingers as they grasped the scissors, as they pinned the black
paper.
Finally, she tried to lift the canvas, as if she were alone in that space, but she
couldn’t. Marcello readily intervened, I intervened, we leaned it against the
wall. Then we all backed up toward the door, some sneering, some grim, some
appalled. The body of the bride Lila appeared cruelly shredded. Much of the
head had disappeared, as had the stomach. There remained an eye, the hand
on which the chin rested, the brilliant stain of the mouth, the diagonal stripe
of the bust, the line of the crossed legs, the shoes.
Gigliola began, scarcely containing her rage: “I cannot put a thing like that
in my shop.”
“I agree,” Pinuccia exploded. “We have to sell here, and with that grotesque
thing people will run away. Rino, say something to your sister, please.”
Rino pretended to ignore her, but he turned to Stefano as if his brother-in-
law were to blame for what was happening. “I told you, you can’t reason with
her. You have to say yes, no, and that’s it, or you see what happens? It’s a waste
of time.”
Stefano didn’t answer, he stared at the panel leaning against the wall and it
was evident that he was looking for a way out. He asked me, “What do you
think, Lenù?”
I said in Italian, “To me it seems very beautiful. Of course, I wouldn’t want it
in the neighborhood, that’s not the right place for it. But here it’s something
else, it will attract attention, it will please. In Confidenze just last week I saw
that in Rossano Brazzi’s house there is a painting like this.”
Hearing that, Gigliola got even angrier. “What do you mean? That Rossano
Brazzi knows what’s what, that you two know everything, and Pinuccia and I
don’t?”
At that point I felt the danger. I had only to glance at Lila to realize that, if
when we arrived at the shop she had really felt willing to give in should the
attempt  prove  fruitless,  now  that  the  attempt  had  been  made  and  had
produced  that  image  of  disfigurement  she  wouldn’t  yield  an  inch.  Those
minutes  of  work  on  the  picture  had  broken  ties:  at  that  moment  she  was
overwhelmed by an exaggerated sense of herself, and it would take time for
her to retreat into the dimension of the grocer’s wife, she wouldn’t accept a
sigh of dissent. In fact, while Gigliola was speaking, she was already muttering:
Like this or not at all. And she wanted to quarrel, she wanted to break, shatter,
she would have happily hurled herself at Gigliola with the scissors.
I hoped for a word of support from Marcello. But Marcello remained silent,
head down: I understood that his residual feelings for Lila were vanishing at
that  moment,  his  old  depressed  passion  couldn’t  carry  them  forward  any
longer. It was his brother who broke in, lashing Gigliola, his fiancée, in his most
aggressive voice. “Shut up,” he told her. And as soon as she tried to protest he
became threatening, without even looking at her, staring, rather, at the panel:
“Shut up, Gigliò.” Then he turned to Lila.
“I like it, signò. You’ve erased yourself deliberately and I see why: to show
the thigh, to show how well a woman’s thigh goes with those shoes. Excellent.
You’re a pain in the ass, but when you do a thing you do it right.”
Silence.
With her fingertips Gigliola dried silent tears that she couldn’t hold back.
Pinuccia stared at Rino, she stared at her brother, as if she wanted to say to
them: Speak, defend me, don’t let that bitch walk all over me.
Stefano instead murmured softly, “Yes, it convinces me, too.”
And Lila said suddenly, “It’s not finished.”
“What do you still have to do?” Pinuccia shot back.
“I have to add a little color.”
“Color?”  Marcello  mumbled,  even  more  disoriented.  “We’re  supposed  to
open in three days.”
Michele laughed: “If we have to wait another little bit, we’ll wait. Get to
work, signò, do what you like.”
That masterful tone, of one who makes and unmakes as he wishes, Stefano
didn’t like.
“There’s the new grocery,” he said, to let it be understood that he needed his
wife there.
“Figure it out,” Michele answered. “We have more interesting things to do
here.”
26.
We spent the last days of September shut up in the shop, the two of us and
three workmen. They were magnificent hours of play, of invention, of freedom,
such as we hadn’t experienced together perhaps since childhood. Lila drew me
into her frenzy. We bought paste, paint, brushes. With extreme precision (she
was demanding) we attached the black paper cutouts. We traced red or blue
borders between the remains of the photograph and the dark clouds that were
devouring it. Lila had always been good with lines and colors, but here she did
something more, though I wouldn’t have been able to say what it was; hour
after hour it engulfed me.
For a while it seemed to me that she had fashioned that occasion to bring to
an effective end the years that had begun with the designs for the shoes, when
she was still the girl Lina Cerullo. And I still think that much of the pleasure of
those days was derived from the resetting of the conditions of her, or our, life,
from the capacity we had to lift ourselves above ourselves, to isolate ourselves
in the pure and simple fulfillment of that sort of visual synthesis. We forgot
about  Antonio,  Nino,  Stefano,  the  Solaras,  my  problems  with  school,  her
pregnancy, the tensions between us. We suspended time, we isolated space,
there remained only the play of glue, scissors, paper, paint: the play of shared
creation.
But there was something else. I was soon reminded of the word Michele had
used: erase. Likely, yes, very likely the black stripes did set the shoes apart and
make them more visible: young Solara wasn’t stupid, he knew how to look. But
at times, and with growing intensity, I felt that that wasn’t the true goal of our
pasting and painting. Lila was happy, and she was drawing me deeper and
deeper into her fierce happiness, because she had suddenly found, perhaps
without even realizing it, an opportunity that allowed her to portray the fury
she directed against herself, the insurgence, perhaps for the first time in her
life, of the need—and here the verb used by Michele was appropriate—to erase
herself.
Today, in the light of many subsequent events, I’m quite sure that that is
really what happened. With the black paper, with the green and purple circles
that Lila drew around certain parts of her body, with the blood-red lines with
which  she  sliced  and  said  she  was  slicing  it,  she  completed  her  own  self-
destruction in an image, presented to the eyes of all in the space bought by the
Solaras to display and sell her shoes.
It’s  likely  that  it  was  she  who  provoked  in  me  that  impression,  who
motivated it. While we worked, she began to talk about when she had begun to
realize that she was now Signora Carracci. At first I didn’t really understand
what she was saying, her observations seemed to me banal. When, as girls, of
course, we were in love, we would try out the sound of our name joined to the
last name of the beloved. I, for example, still have a notebook from the first
year of high school in which I practiced signing myself Elena Sarratore, and I
clearly remember how I would very faintly whisper that name. But it wasn’t
what Lila meant. I soon realized that she was confessing exactly the opposite, a
game like mine had never occurred to her. Nor, she said, had the formula of
her  new  designation  at  first  made  much  of  an  impression:  Raffaella  Cerullo
Carracci. Nothing exciting, nothing serious. In the beginning, that “Carracci”
had been no more absorbing than an exercise in logical analysis, of the sort
that Maestra Oliviero had hammered into us in elementary school. What was it,
an indirect object of place? Did it mean that she now lived not with her parents
but with Stefano? Did it mean that the new house where she was going to live
would have on the door a brass plate that said “Carracci”? Did it mean that if I
were to write to her I would no longer address the letter to Raffaella Cerullo
but to Raffaella Carracci? Did it mean that in everyday usage Cerullo would soon
disappear  from  Raffaella  Cerullo  Carracci,  and  that  she  herself  would  define
herself, and sign, only as Raffaella Carracci, and that her children would have
to make an effort to recall their mother’s surname, and that her grandchildren
would be completely ignorant of their grandmother’s surname?
Yes. A custom. Everything according to the rules, then. But Lila, as usual,
hadn’t stopped there, she had soon gone further. As we worked with brushes
and paints, she told me that she had begun to see in that formula an indirect
object of place to which, as if Cerullo Carracci somehow indicated that Cerullo
goes toward Carracci, falls into it, is sucked up by it, is dissolved in it. And, from the
abrupt assignment of the role of speech maker at her wedding to Silvio Solara,
from the entrance into the restaurant of Marcello Solara, wearing on his feet,
no less, the shoes that Stefano had led her to believe he considered a sacred
relic, from her honeymoon and the beatings, up until that installation—in the
void that she felt inside, the living thing determined by Stefano—she had been
increasingly  oppressed  by  an  unbearable  sensation,  a  force  pushing  down
harder and harder, crushing her. That impression had been getting stronger,
had  prevailed.  Raffaella  Cerullo,  overpowered,  had  lost  her  shape  and  had
dissolved inside the outlines of Stefano, becoming a subsidiary emanation of
him: Signora Carracci. It was then that I began to see in the panel the traces of
what she was saying. “It’s a thing that’s still going on,” she said in a whisper.
And meanwhile we pasted paper, laid on color. But what were we really doing,
what was I helping her do?
The workmen, in great bewilderment, attached the panel to the wall. We
were  sad  but  we  didn’t  say  so;  the  game  was  over.  We  cleaned  the  shop
thoroughly. Lila changed her mind once again about the position of a sofa, of
an ottoman. Finally we withdrew together to the door and contemplated our
work.  She  burst  out  laughing  as  I  had  never  heard  her  laugh,  a  free,  self-
mocking laugh. I, on the other hand, was so enthralled by the upper part of the
panel, where Lila’s head no longer was, that I couldn’t take in the whole. All
you could see, at the top, was a very vivid eye, encircled by midnight blue and
red.
27.
The  day  of  the  opening  Lila  arrived  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri  sitting  in  the
convertible next to her husband. When she got out, I saw in her the uncertain
gaze  of  someone  who  is  afraid  something  bad  is  going  to  happen.  The
overexcitement of the days of the panel had dissipated; she had again taken on
the sickly look of a woman who is unwillingly pregnant. Yet she was carefully
dressed,  she  seemed  to  have  stepped  out  of  a  fashion  magazine.  She
immediately left Stefano and dragged me off to look at the shopwindows of Via
dei Mille.
We walked for a while. She was tense, she kept asking me if anything was
out of place.
“Do you remember,” she said suddenly, “the girl dressed all in green, the one
with the derby?”
I remembered. I remembered the uneasiness we had felt when we saw her,
on that same street, years before, and the fight between our boys and the local
boys, and the intervention of the Solaras, and Michele with the iron bar, and
the fear. I realized that she wanted to hear something soothing, I said:
“It was just a matter of money, Lila. Today it’s all changed, you’re much
prettier than the girl in green.”
But  I  thought:  It’s  not  true,  I’m  lying  to  you.  There  was  something
malevolent in the inequality, and now I knew it. It acted in the depths, it dug
deeper than money. The cash of two grocery stores, and even of the shoe
factory and the shoe store, was not sufficient to hide our origin. Lila herself,
even if she had taken from the cash drawer more money than she had taken,
even  if  she  had  taken  millions,  thirty,  even  fifty,  couldn’t  do  it.  I  had
understood this, and finally there was something that I knew better than she
did, I had learned it not on those streets but outside the school, looking at the
girl  who  came  to  meet  Nino.  She  was  superior  to  us,  just  as  she  was,
unwittingly. And this was unendurable.
We returned to the shop. The afternoon went on like a kind of marriage
feast: food, sweets, a lot of wine; all the guests in the clothes they had worn to
Lila’s wedding, Fernando, Nunzia, Rino, the entire Solara family, Alfonso, we
girls, Ada, Carmela, and I. There was a crowd of cars haphazardly parked, there
was a crowd in the shop, the clamor of voices grew louder. The entire time,
Gigliola and Pinuccia competed to act like the proprietor, each striving harder
than the other, and both worn out by the strain. The panel with Lila’s picture
loomed over everything. Some paused to look at it with interest, some gave it a
skeptical glance or even laughed. I couldn’t take my eyes off it. Lila was no
longer recognizable. What remained was a seductive, tremendous form, the
image of a one-eyed goddess who thrust her beautifully shod feet into the
center of the room.
In the crush I was amazed by Alfonso, who was lively, cheerful, elegant. I had
never seen him like that, at school or in the neighborhood or in the grocery,
and  Lila  herself  pondered  him  for  a  long  time,  perplexed.  I  said  to  her,
laughing, “He’s not himself anymore.”
“What happened to him?”
“I don’t know.”
Alfonso was the true good news of that afternoon. Something that had been
silent  in  him  awakened,  in  the  brightly  lit  shop.  It  was  as  if  he  had
unexpectedly discovered that this part of the city made him feel good. He
became unusually active. We saw him arrange this object and that, start up
conversations  with  the  stylish  people  who  came  in  out  of  curiosity,  who
examined the shoes or grabbed a pastry and a glass of vermouth. At a certain
point he joined us and in a self-assured tone praised effusively the work we
had done on the photograph. He was in a state of such mental freedom that he
overcame his timidity and said to his sister-in-law, “I’ve always known you
were dangerous,” and he kissed her on both cheeks. I stared at him perplexed.
Dangerous? What had he perceived, in the panel, that had escaped me? Was
Alfonso capable of seeing beyond appearances? Did he know how to look with
imagination? Is it possible, I wondered, that his real future is not in studying
but in this affluent part of the city, where he’ll be able to use the little he’s
learning in school? Ah yes, he concealed inside himself another person. He was
different from all the boys of the neighborhood, and mainly he was different
from his brother, Stefano, who, sitting on an ottoman in a corner, was silent
but ready to respond with a tranquil smile to anyone who spoke to him.
Evening fell. Suddenly a bright light flared outside. The Solaras, grandfather,
father, mother, sons, rushed out to see, gripped by a noisy familial enthusiasm.
We all went out into the street. Above the windows and the entrance shone the
word “SOLARA.”
Lila grimaced, she said to me, “They gave in on that, too.”
She pushed me reluctantly toward Rino, who seemed happiest of all, and
said to him, “If the shoes are Cerullo, why is the shop Solara?”
Rino took her by the arm and said in a low voice, “Lina, why do you always
want to be a pain in the ass? You remember the mess you got me into in this
very square? What am I supposed to do, you want another mess? Be satisfied
for once. We are here, in the center of Naples, and we are the masters. Those
shits who wanted to beat us up less than three years ago—do you see them
now? They stop, they look in the windows, they go in, they take a pastry. Isn’t
that enough for you? Cerullo shoes, Solara shop. What do you want to see up
there, Carracci?”
Lila  was  evasive,  saying  to  him,  without  aggression,  “I’m  perfectly  calm.
Enough to tell you that you’d better not ask me for anything ever again. What
do you think you’re doing? Do you borrow money from Signora Solara? Does
Stefano borrow money from her? Are you both in debt to her, and so you
always say yes? From now on, every man for himself, Rino.”
She abandoned us, headed straight toward Michele Solara, in a playfully
flirtatious way. I saw that she went off with him to the square, they walked
around the stone lions. I saw that her husband followed her with his gaze. I saw
that  he  didn’t  take  his  eyes  off  her  all  the  while  she  and  Michele  walked,
talking. I saw that Gigliola grew furious, she whispered in Pinuccia’s ear and
they both stared at her.
Meanwhile the shop emptied, someone turned off the large, luminous sign.
The square darkened for a few seconds, then the street lamps regained their
strength. Lila left Michele laughing, but as she entered the shop her face was
suddenly drained of life, she shut herself in the back room where the toilet
was.
Alfonso, Marcello, Pinuccia, and Gigliola began to straighten up. I went to
help.
Lila came out of the bathroom and Stefano, as if he had been waiting in
ambush, immediately grabbed her by the arm. She wriggled free, irritated, and
joined me. She was very pale. She whispered, “I’ve had some blood. What does
it mean, is the baby dead?”
28.
Lila’s  pregnancy  lasted  scarcely  more  than  ten  weeks;  then  the  midwife
came and scraped away everything. The next day she went back to work in the
new grocery with Carmen Peluso. This marked the beginning of a long period
in which, sometimes gentle, sometimes fierce, she stopped running around,
having apparently decided to compress her whole life into the orderliness of
that  space  fragrant  with  mortar  and  cheese,  filled  with  sausages,  bread,
mozzarella,  anchovies  in  salt,  hunks  of  cicoli,  sacks  overflowing  with  dried
beans, bladders stuffed with lard.
This behavior  was  greatly appreciated  in  particular by  Stefano’s  mother,
Maria. As if she had recognized in her daughter-in-law something of herself,
she suddenly became more affectionate, and gave her some old earrings of red
gold. Lila accepted them with pleasure and wore them often. For a while her
face remained pale, she had pimples on her forehead, her eyes were sunk deep
into the sockets, the skin was stretched so tight over her cheekbones that it
seemed  transparent.  Then  she  revived  and  put  even  more  energy  into
promoting the shop. Already by Christmastime the profits had risen and within
a few months surpassed those of the grocery in the old neighborhood.
Maria’s  appreciation  grew.  She  went  more  and  more  often  to  give  her
daughter-in-law a hand, rather than her son, whose failed paternity—along
with the pressures of business—had made him surly, or her daughter, who had
started working in the store in Piazza dei Martiri and had strictly forbidden her
mother to appear, so as not to make a bad impression with the clientele. The
old Signora Carracci even took the young Signora Carracci’s side when Stefano
and Pinuccia blamed her for her inability, or unwillingness, to keep a baby
inside her.
“She doesn’t want children,” Stefano complained.
“Yes,” Pinuccia supported him, “she wants to stay a girl, she doesn’t know
how to be a wife.”
Maria reproached them both harshly: “Don’t even think such things, Our
Lord gives children and Our Lord takes them away, I don’t want to hear that
nonsense.”
“You be quiet,” her daughter cried, in annoyance. “You gave that bitch the
earrings I liked.”
Their arguments, Lila’s reactions, soon became neighborhood gossip, which
spread, and even I heard it. But I didn’t pay much attention, the school year
had begun.
It started right off in a way that amazed me most of all. I did well from the
first days, as if, with the departure of Antonio, the disappearance of Nino,
maybe even Lila’s decisive commitment to managing the grocery, something in
my head had relaxed. I found that I remembered with precision everything I
had learned badly in my first year; I answered the teachers’ questions with
ready intelligence. Not only that. Professor Galiani, maybe because she had lost
Nino, her most brilliant student, redoubled her interest in me and said that it
would be stimulating and instructive for me to go to a march for world peace
that started in Resina and continued on to Naples. I decided to have a look,
partly  out  of  curiosity,  partly  out  of  fear  that  Professor  Galiani  would  be
offended, and partly because the march went along the stradone, skirting the
neighborhood, and it wouldn’t take much effort. But my mother wanted me to
take my brothers. I argued, I protested, and was late. I arrived with them at the
railway bridge, and down below saw the people marching; they occupied the
whole street, preventing the cars from passing. They were normal people and
weren’t really marching but walking, carrying banners and signs. I wanted to
find Professor Galiani, to be seen, and I ordered my brothers to wait on the
bridge. It was a terrible idea: I couldn’t find the professor, and, as soon as I
turned my back, they joined some other children who were throwing stones at
the demonstrators and yelling insults. In a sweat I rushed to get them, and
hurried them away, terrified by the idea that the far-sighted Professor Galiani
had picked them out and recognized that they were my brothers.
Meanwhile the weeks passed, there were new classes and the textbooks to
buy. It seemed pointless to show the list of books to my mother so that she
would negotiate with my father and get money from him, I knew that there
was no money. In addition, there was no news of Maestra Oliviero. Between
August and September, I had gone twice to visit her in the hospital, but the
first time I had found her asleep and the second I discovered that she had been
discharged but had not returned home. Feeling desperate, in early November I
went to ask the neighbor about her, and learned that, because of her health,
she had gone to a sister in Potenza, and who knew if she would ever return to
Naples, to the neighborhood, to her job. At that point I decided to ask Alfonso
if, when his brother had bought the books for him, we could somehow arrange
things so that I could use his. He was enthusiastic and proposed that we should
study  together,  maybe  at  Lila’s  house,  which,  ever  since  she  had  started
working at the grocery, was empty from seven in the morning until nine at
night. We resolved to do that.
But one morning Alfonso said to me, somewhat annoyed, “Go and see Lila in
the grocery today, she wants to see you.” He knew why, but she had sworn him
to silence and it was impossible to get the secret out of him.
In  the  afternoon  I  went  to  the  new  grocery.  Carmen,  with  a  mixture  of
sadness and joy, wanted to show me a card from some city in Piedmont that
Enzo, her fiancé, had sent her. Lila had also received a card, from Antonio, and
for a moment I thought she had wanted me to come there just to show it to me.
But she didn’t show it to me or tell me what he had written. She dragged me
into the back of the shop and asked, in a tone of amusement:
“You remember our bet?”
I nodded yes.
“You remember that you lost?”
I nodded yes.
“You remember that you now have to pass with the best grades?”
I nodded yes.
She pointed to two large packages tied up in wrapping paper. In them were
the school books.
29.
They were very heavy. At home, I was very excited to discover that they
were not the used, often ill-smelling volumes that in the past the teacher had
got  for  me  but  were  brand-new,  fragrant  with  fresh  ink,  and  conspicuous
among them were the dictionaries—Zingarelli, Rocci, and Calonghi-Georges—
which the teacher had never been able to acquire.
My mother, who had a word of contempt for anything that happened to me,
burst  into  tears  as  she  watched  me  unwrap  the  packages.  Surprised,
intimidated  by  that  unusual  reaction,  I  went  to  her,  caressed  her  arm.  It’s
difficult to say what had moved her: maybe her sense of impotence in the face
of our poverty, maybe the generosity of the grocer’s wife, I don’t know. She
calmed  down  quickly,  muttered  something  incomprehensible,  and  became
engrossed in her duties.
In the little room where I slept with my sister and brothers I had a small,
rough table, riddled with worm holes, where I usually did my homework. On it
I arranged all the books, and, seeing them lined up there, against the wall, I felt
charged with energy.
The days began to fly by. I gave back to Professor Galiani the books she had
lent me for the summer, she gave me others, which were even more difficult. I
read them diligently on Sundays, but I didn’t understand much. I ran my eyes
along the lines, I turned the pages, and yet the style annoyed me, the meaning
escaped me. That year, my fourth year of high school, between studying and
difficult readings, I was exhausted, but it was the exhaustion of contentment.
One day Professor Galiani asked me, “What newspaper do you read, Greco?”
That question provoked the same uneasiness I had felt talking to Nino at
Lila’s wedding. The professor took it for granted that I normally did something
that at my house, in my environment, was not at all normal. How could I tell
her that my father didn’t buy the newspaper, that I had never read one? I
didn’t have the heart, and my mind raced to remember if Pasquale, who was a
Communist, read one. A useless effort. Then I thought of Donato Sarratore and
I remembered Ischia, the Maronti, I remembered that he wrote for Roma. I
answered:
“I read Roma.”
The professor gave an ironic half smile, and the next day began handing on
her newspapers. She bought two, sometimes three, and after school she would
give me one. I thanked her and went home upset by what seemed to me still
more homework.
At first I left the paper around the house, and put off reading it until I had
finished my homework, but at night it had disappeared, my father had grabbed
it to read in bed or in the bathroom. So I got in the habit of hiding it among my
books, and took it out only at night, when everyone was sleeping. Sometimes it
was Unità, sometimes Il Mattino, sometimes Corriere della Sera, but all three were
difficult for me, it was like having to follow a comic strip whose preceding
episodes you didn’t know. I hurried from one column to the next, more out of
duty than out of real curiosity, hoping, as in all things imposed by school, that
what  I  didn’t  understand  today  I  would,  by  sheer  persistence,  understand
tomorrow.
In that period I saw little of Lila. Sometimes, right after school, before I
rushed off to do my homework, I went to the new grocery. I was starving, she
knew it, and would make me a generously stuffed sandwich. While I devoured
it,  I  would  articulate,  in  good  Italian,  statements  I  had  memorized  from
Professor  Galiani’s  books  and  newspapers.  I  would  mention,  let’s  say,  “the
atrocious reality of the Nazi extermination camps,” or “what men were able to
do  and  what  they  can  do  today  as  well,”  or  “the  atomic  threat  and  the
obligation to peace,” or the fact that “as a result of subduing the forces of
nature with the tools that we invent, we find ourselves today at the point
where the force of our tools has become a greater concern than the forces of
nature,” or “the need for a culture that combats and eliminates suffering,” or
the idea that “religion will disappear from men’s consciousness when, finally,
we have constructed a world of equals, without class distinctions, and with a
sound scientific conception of society and of life.” I talked to her about these
and  other  things  because  I  wanted  to  show  her  that  I  was  sailing  toward
passing with high marks, and because I didn’t know who else to say them to,
and because I hoped she would respond so that we could resume our old habit
of discussion. But she said almost nothing, in fact she seemed embarrassed, as
if she didn’t really understand what I was talking about. Or if she made a
remark, she concluded by digging up an old obsession that now—I didn’t know
why—had started working inside her again. She began to talk about the origin
of Don Achille’s money, and of the Solaras’, even in the presence of Carmen,
who immediately agreed. But as soon as a customer came in she stopped, she
became very polite and efficient, she sliced, weighed, took money.
Once, she left the cash drawer open and, staring at the money, said, angrily,
“I earn this with my labor and Carmen’s. But nothing in there is mine, Lenù, it’s
made  with  Stefano’s  money.  And  Stefano  to  make  money  started  with  his
father’s money. Without what Don Achille put under the mattress, working the
black market and loan-sharking, today there would not be this and there would
not be the shoe factory. Not only that. Stefano, Rino, my father would not have
sold a single shoe without the money and the connections of the Solara family,
who are also loan sharks. Is it clear what I’ve got myself into?”
Clear, but I didn’t understand the point of those discussions.
“It’s water under the bridge,” I said, and reminded her of the conclusions
she had come to when she was engaged to Stefano. “What you’re talking about
is what’s behind us, we are something else.”
But although she had invented that theory, she did not seem convinced by
it. She said to me, and I have a vivid memory of the phrase, which was in
dialect:
“I don’t like what I’ve done and what I’m doing.”
I thought that she must be spending time with Pasquale, who had always
had  opinions  like  that.  I  thought  that  maybe  their  relationship  had  been
strengthened by the fact that Pasquale was engaged to Ada, who worked in the
old grocery, and was the brother of Carmen, who worked with her in the new
one. I went home dissatisfied, struggling to hold off an old childhood feeling,
from the period when I suffered because Lila and Carmela had become friends
and tried to exclude me. I calmed myself down by studying until very late.
One night as I was reading Il Mattino, my eyes heavy with sleep, a short,
unsigned article jolted me awake like an electric charge. I couldn’t believe it—
the article was about the shop in Piazza dei Martiri and it praised the panel
that Lila and I had created.
I read and reread it, I can still recall a few lines: “The young women who
manage the friendly shop in Piazza dei Martiri did not want to reveal the name
of the artist. A pity. Whoever invented that anomalous mixture of photography
and color has an avant-garde imagination that, with sublime ingenuity but also
with unusual energy, subdues the material to the urgent needs of an intimate,
potent  grief.”  Otherwise,  it  had  generous  praise  for  the  shoe  store,  “an
important sign of the dynamism that, in recent years, has invested Neapolitan
entrepreneurial endeavors.”
I didn’t sleep a wink.
After school I hurried to find Lila. The shop was empty, Carmen had gone
home to her mother, Giuseppina, who wasn’t well, Lila was on the phone with a
local  supplier  who  had  not  delivered  mozzarella  or  provolone  or  I  don’t
remember what. I heard her shout, curse, I was upset. I thought maybe the
man at the other end was old, he would be insulted, he would send one of his
sons to take revenge. I thought: Why does she always overdo it? When she got
off the phone she gave a snort of contempt and turned to me to apologize: “If I
don’t act like that, they won’t even listen to me.”
I showed her the newspaper. She gave it a distracted glance, said, “I know
about  it.”  She  explained  that  it  had  been  an  initiative  of  Michele  Solara’s,
carried out as usual without consulting anyone. Look, she said, and went to the
cash register, took out of the drawer a couple of creased clippings, handed
them to me. Those, too, were about the shop in Piazza dei Martiri. One was a
small article in Roma, whose author lavished praise on the Solaras, but made
not the slightest mention of the panel. The other was an article spread over
three columns, in Napoli Notte, and in it the shop sounded like a royal palace.
The space was described in an extravagant Italian that praised the furnishings,
the splendid illumination, the marvelous shoes, and, above all, “the kindness,
the  sweetness,  and  the  grace  of  the  two  seductive  Nereids,  Miss  Gigliola
Spagnuolo and Miss Giuseppina Carracci, marvelous young women upon whom
rests  the  fate  of  an  enterprise  that  stands  high  among  the  flourishing
commercial activities of our city.” You had to get to the end to find a mention
of the panel, which was dismissed in a few lines. The author of the article
called it “a crude mess, an out-of-tune note in a place of majestic refinement.”
“Did you see the signature?” Lila asked, teasingly.
The article in Roma was signed “d.s.” and the article in Napoli Notte bore the
signature of Donato Sarratore, Nino’s father.
“Yes.”
“And what do you say?”
“What should I say?”
“Like father like son, you should say.”
She laughed mirthlessly. She explained that, seeing the growing success of
Cerullo  shoes  and  the  Solara  shop,  Michele  had  decided  to  publicize  the
business and had distributed a few gratuities here and there, thanks to which
the  city  newspapers  had  promptly  come  out  with  admiring  articles.
Advertising, in other words. Paid for. Pointless even to read. In those articles,
she said, there was not a single true word.
I was disappointed. I didn’t like the way she belittled the newspapers, which
I was diligently trying to read, sacrificing sleep. And I didn’t like her emphasis
on the relationship between Nino and the author of the two articles. What
need  was  there  to  associate  Nino  with  his  father,  a  pompous  fabricator  of
factitious phrases?
30.
Yet it was thanks to those phrases that in a short time the Solaras’ shop and
Cerullo  shoes  became  more  successful.  Gigliola  and  Pinuccia  boasted  a  lot
about  how  they  had  been  quoted  in  the  papers,  but  the  success  did  not
diminish their rivalry and each went on to give herself the credit for the shop’s
fortunes, and began to consider the other an obstacle to further successes. On a
single point they continued to agree: Lila’s panel was an abomination. They
were rude to anyone who, in a refined little voice, stopped in just to have a
look at it. And they framed the articles from Roma and Napoli Notte, but not the
one from Il Mattino.
Between Christmas and Easter, the Solaras and the Carraccis made a lot of
money. Stefano, especially, drew a sigh of relief. The new grocery and the old
one were prospering, the Cerullo shoe factory was working at full capacity. In
addition, the shop in Piazza dei Martiri revealed what he had always known,
and that is that the shoes Lila had designed years before sold well not only on
the Rettifilo, Via Foria, and Corso Garibaldi but were coveted by the wealthy,
those who casually reached for their wallets. An important market, therefore,
which had to be consolidated and expanded.
As proof of that success, in the spring some good imitations of Cerullo shoes
began to appear in the shopwindows of the outlying neighborhoods. These
shoes were essentially identical to Lila’s, but slightly modified by a fringe, a
stud. Protests, threats immediately blocked their circulation: Michele Solara
straightened  things  out.  But  he  didn’t  stop  there,  he  soon  reached  the
conclusion that new models had to be designed. For that reason, one evening
in  the  shop  in  Piazza  dei  Martiri,  he  summoned  his  brother  Marcello,  the
Carraccis,  Rino,  and,  naturally,  Gigliola  and  Pinuccia.  Surprisingly,  Stefano
showed up without Lila, he said that his wife was sorry, she was tired.
Her absence did not please the Solara brothers. If Lila isn’t here, Michele
said, making Gigliola nervous, what the fuck are we talking about. But Rino
immediately interrupted. He asserted, lying, that he and his father had begun
some time ago to think of new models and planned to introduce them at a
trade show that was to be held in Arezzo in September. Michele didn’t believe
him, and became still more irritable. He said that they had to come out with
products that were really innovative and not with normal stuff. Finally he
turned to Stefano:
“Your wife is necessary, you’ve got to make her come.”
Stefano answered with startling hostility: “My wife works hard all day in the
grocery store and at night she has to stay home, she has to think of me.”
“All  right,”  Michele  said,  with  a  grimace,  spoiling  for  a  moment  his
handsome boy’s face. “But see if she can think of us, too, a little.”
The evening left everyone unhappy, but Pinuccia and Gigliola in particular.
For  different  reasons,  they  found  the  importance  that  Michele  gave  Lila
intolerable,  and  in  the  following  days  their  disgruntlement  became  a  dark
mood that at the slightest opportunity gave rise to a quarrel.
At that point—I think it was March—an accident happened; I don’t really
know how. One afternoon, during one of their daily disagreements, Gigliola
slapped Pinuccia. Pinuccia complained to Rino, who, believing at the time that
he was riding the crest of a wave as high as a house, came to the shop with a
proprietary air and told Gigliola off. Gigliola reacted aggressively and he went
so far as to threaten to fire her.
“Starting tomorrow,” he said to her, “you can go and stuff ricotta in the
cannoli again.”
Then Michele showed up. Smiling, he led Rino outside, to the square, to
indicate the sign over the door.
“My friend,” he said, “the shop is called Solara and you have no right to
come here and tell my girlfriend: I’m firing you.”
Rino retaliated by reminding him that everything in the shop belonged to
his brother-in-law, and that he made the shoes himself, so he certainly did
have the right. Inside, meanwhile, Gigliola and Pinuccia, each feeling protected
by her own fiancé, had already started fighting again. The two young men
hurried  back  inside,  tried  to  calm  them  down,  and  couldn’t.  Michele  lost
patience and cried that he would fire them both. Not only that: he let slip that
he would have Lila manage the shop.
Lila?
The shop?
The two girls were silent and the idea left even Rino speechless. Then the
discussion started up again, this time focused on that outrageous statement.
Gigliola, Pinuccia, and Rino were allied against Michele—what’s wrong, what
use to you is Lina, we’re making money here, you can’t complain, I thought up
all the shoe styles, she was a child, what could she invent—and the tension
increased. Who knows how long the quarreling would have gone on if the
accident I mentioned hadn’t happened. Suddenly, and it’s unclear how, the
panel—the  panel  with  the  strips  of  black  paper,  the  photograph,  the  thick
patches of color—let out a rasping sound, a kind of sick breath, and burst into
flame. Pinuccia had her back to the photograph when it happened. The fire
blazed up behind her as if from a secret hearth and licked her hair, which
crackled  and  would  have  burned  completely  if  Rino  hadn’t  quickly
extinguished it with his bare hands.
31.
Both Rino and Michele blamed Gigliola for the fire, because she smoked
secretly and so had a tiny lighter. According to Rino, Gigliola had done it on
purpose: while they were all occupied by their wrangling, she had set fire to
the  panel,  which,  loaded  with  paper,  glue,  paint,  had  instantly  burst  into
flames. Michele was more circumspect: Gigliola, he knew, continuously toyed
with the lighter and so, unintentionally, caught up in the argument, hadn’t
realized that the flame was too close to the photograph. But the girl couldn’t
bear either the first hypothesis or the second, and with a fiercely combative
look blamed Lila herself, that is, she blamed the disfigured image, which had
caught  fire  spontaneously,  like  the  Devil,  who,  attempting  to  corrupt  the
saints, assumed the features of a woman, but the saints called on Jesus, and the
demon was transformed into flames. She added, in confirmation of her version,
that Pinuccia herself had told her that her sister-in-law had the ability not to
stay pregnant, and, in fact, if she was unsuccessful she would let the child drain
out, rejecting the gifts of the Lord.
This gossip grew worse when Michele Solara began to go regularly to the
new grocery store. He spent a lot of time joking with Lila, joking with Carmen,
so that Carmen hypothesized that he came for her and on the one hand was
afraid that someone would tell Enzo, doing his military service in Piedmont,
while on the other she was flattered and began to flirt. Lila instead made fun of
the young Solara. She heard the rumors spread by his fiancée and so she said to
him: “You’d better go, we’re witches here, we’re very dangerous.”
But when I went to see her, during that period, I never found her truly
cheerful. She assumed an artificial tone and was sarcastic about everything.
Did she have a bruise on her arm? Stefano had caressed her too passionately.
Were her eyes red from crying? Those were tears of happiness, not grief. Be
careful of Michele, he liked to hurt people? No, she said, all he has to do is
touch me and he’ll burn: it’s I who hurt people.
On that last point there had always been modest agreement. But Gigliola
especially had no doubts by now: Lila was a witch-whore, she had cast a spell
on her fiancé; that’s why he wanted her to manage the shop in Piazza dei
Martiri. And for days, jealous, desperate, she wouldn’t go to work. Then she
decided to talk to Pinuccia, they became allies, and moved to the offensive.
Pinuccia worked on her brother, insisting that he was a happy cuckold, and
then  she  attacked  Rino,  her  fiancé,  telling  him  that  he  wasn’t  a  boss  but
Michele’s servant. So one evening Stefano and Rino waited for Michele outside
the  bar,  and  when  he  appeared  they  made  a  very  general  speech  that  in
substance, however, meant: leave Lila alone, you’re making her waste time, she
has to work. Michele immediately got the message and replied coldly: “What
the fuck are you saying?”
“If you don’t understand it means you don’t want to understand.”
“No, my fine friends, it’s you who don’t want to understand our commercial
needs. And if you won’t understand them, I necessarily have to see to them.”
“Meaning?” Stefano asked.
“Your wife is wasted in the grocery.”
“In what sense?”
“In Piazza dei Martiri she would make in a month what your sister and
Gigliola couldn’t make in a hundred years.”
“Explain yourself.”
“Lina needs to command, Ste’. She needs to have a responsibility. She should
invent  things.  She  ought  to  start  thinking  right  away  about  the  new  shoe
styles.”
They  argued  and  finally,  amid  a  thousand  fine  distinctions,  came  to  an
agreement. Stefano absolutely refused to let his wife go and work in Piazza dei
Martiri: the new grocery was going well and to take Lila out of there would be
foolish; but he agreed to have her design new models right away, at least for
winter. Michele said that not to let Lila run the shoe store was stupid, and with
a  vaguely  threatening  coolness  he  put  off  the  discussion  until  after  the
summer;  he  considered  it  a  done  deal  that  she  would  start  designing  new
shoes.
“They have to be chic,” he urged, “you have to insist on that point.”
“She’ll do what she wants, as usual.”
“I can advise her, she’ll listen to me,” said Michele.
“There’s no need.”
I went to see Lila shortly after that agreement, and she spoke to me about it
herself. I had just come from school, the weather was already getting hot, and I
was tired. She was alone in the grocery and for the moment she seemed as if
relieved. She said that she wouldn’t design anything, not even a sandal, not
even a slipper.
“They’ll get mad.”
“What can I do about it?”
“It’s money, Lila.”
“They already have enough.”
It was her usual sort of obstinacy, I thought. She was like that, as soon as
someone told her to focus on something the wish to do so vanished. But I soon
realized that it wasn’t a matter of her character or even of disgust with the
business  affairs  of  her  husband,  Rino,  and  the  Solaras,  reinforced  by  the
Communist arguments of Pasquale and Carmen. There was something more
and she spoke slowly, seriously, about it.
“Nothing comes to mind,” she said.
“Have you tried?”
“Yes. But it’s not the way it was when I was twelve.”
The shoes—I understood—had come out of her brain only that one time and
they  wouldn’t  again,  she  didn’t  have  any  others.  That  game  was  over,  she
didn’t know how to start it again. The smell of leather repelled her, of skins,
what she had done she no longer knew how to do. And then everything had
changed. Fernando’s small shop had been consumed by the new spaces, by the
workers’ benches, by three machines. Her father had as it were grown smaller,
he didn’t even quarrel with his oldest son, he worked and that was all. Even
affections were as if deflated. If she still felt tender toward her mother when
she came to the grocery to fill her shopping bags, free, as if they still lived in
poverty, if she still gave little gifts to her younger siblings, she could no longer
feel the bond with Rino. Ruined, broken. The need to help and protect him had
diminished. Thus the motivations for the fantasy of the shoes had vanished,
the soil in which they had germinated was arid. It was most of all, she said
suddenly, a way of showing you that I could do something well even if I had
stopped going to school. Then she laughed nervously, glancing obliquely at me
to see my reaction.
I didn’t answer, prevented by a strong emotion. Lila was like that? She didn’t
have my stubborn diligence? She drew out of herself thoughts, shoes, words
written and spoken, complicated plans, rages and inventions, only to show me
something  of  herself?  Having  lost  that  motivation,  she  was  lost?  Even  the
treatment to which she had subjected her wedding photograph—even that she
would never be able to repeat? Everything, in her, was the result of the chaos
of an occasion?
I felt that in some part of me a long painful tension was relaxing, and her
wet eyes, her fragile smile moved me. But it didn’t last. She continued to speak,
she touched her forehead with a gesture that was customary with her, she said,
regretfully, “I always have to prove that I can be better,” and she added darkly,
“When we opened this place, Stefano showed me how to cheat on the weight;
and at first I shouted you’re a thief, that’s how you make money, and then I
couldn’t resist, I showed him that I had learned and immediately found my
own ways to cheat and I showed him, and I was constantly thinking up new
ones: I’ll cheat you all, I cheat you on the weight and a thousand other things, I
cheat the neighborhood, don’t trust me, Lenù, don’t trust what I say and do.”
I was uneasy. In the space of a few seconds she had changed, already I no
longer knew what she wanted. Why was she speaking to me like this now? I
didn’t know  if she  had decided to  or if  the words  came  out of  her  mouth
unwittingly, an impetuous stream in which the intention of reinforcing the
bond  between  us—a  real  intention—was  immediately  swept  away  by  the
equally real need to deny it specificity: you see, with Stefano I behave the way I
do with you, I act like this with everyone, I’m beauty and the beast, good and
evil. She interlaced her long thin fingers, clasped them tight, asked, “Did you
hear that Gigliola says the photograph caught fire by itself?”
“It’s stupid, Gigliola is mad at you.”
She gave a little laugh that was like a shock, something in her twisted too
abruptly.
“I have something that hurts here, behind the eyes, something is pressing.
You see the knives there? They’re too sharp—I just gave them to the knife
grinder. While I’m slicing salami I think how much blood there is in a person’s
body. If you put too much stuff in things, they break. Or they catch fire and
burn. I’m glad the wedding picture burned. The marriage should burn, too, the
shop, the shoes, the Solaras, everything.”
I  realized  that,  no  matter  how  she  struggled,  worked,  proclaimed,  she
couldn’t get out of it: since the day of her wedding she had been pursued by an
ever greater, increasingly ungovernable unhappiness, and I felt pity. I told her
to be calm, she nodded yes.
“You have to try to relax.”
“Help me.”
“How.”
“Stay near me.”
“That’s what I’m doing.”
“It’s not true. I tell you all my secrets, even the worst, you tell me hardly
anything about yourself.”
“You’re wrong. The only person I don’t hide anything from is you.”
She shook her head no energetically, she said, “Even if you’re better than
me, even if you know more things, don’t leave me.”
32.
They pressured her, wearing her down, and so she pretended to give in. She
told Stefano that she would design the new shoes, and at the first opportunity
she also told Michele. Then she summoned Rino and spoke to him exactly as he
had always wanted her to: “You design them, I can’t. Design them with papa,
you’re in the business, you know how to do it. But until you put them on the
market  and  sell  them,  don’t  tell  anyone  that  I  didn’t  do  them,  not  even
Stefano.”
“And if they don’t go well?”
“It will be my fault.”
“And if they do well?”
“I’ll say how things are and you’ll get the credit you deserve.”
Rino was very pleased with that lie. He set to work with Fernando, but every
so often he went to Lila in complete secrecy to show her what he had in mind.
She examined the styles and at first pretended to admire them, partly because
she couldn’t tolerate his anxious expression, partly to get rid of him quickly.
But soon she herself marveled at how genuinely good the new shoes were—
they resembled the ones now selling and yet were different. “Maybe,” she said
to me one day, in an unexpectedly lighthearted tone, “I really didn’t think up
those shoes, they really are my brother’s work.” And at that point she truly did
seem to be rid of a weight. She rediscovered her affection for Rino, or rather
she  realized  that  she  had  exaggerated:  that  bond  couldn’t  be  dissolved,  it
would never be dissolved, whatever he did, even if a rat came out of his body, a
skittish horse, any sort of animal. The lie—she hypothesized—has relieved Rino
of the anxiety of being inadequate, and that has taken him back to the way he
was as a boy, and now he is discovering that he knows his job, that he’s good at
it. As for Rino himself, he was increasingly satisfied with his sister’s praise. At
the end of every consultation, he asked in a whisper for the house key and, also
in complete secrecy, went to spend an hour there with Pinuccia.
For my part, I tried to show her that I would always be her friend, and on
Sundays I often invited her to go out with me. Once we ventured as far as the
Mostra  d’Oltremare  neighborhood  with  two  of  my  schoolmates,  who  were
intimidated, however, when they found out that she had been married for
more than a year, and behaved respectfully, sedately, as if I had compelled
them to go out with my mother. One asked her hesitantly: “Do you have a
child?”
Lila shook her head no.
“They haven’t come?”
She shook her head no.
From that moment on the evening was more or less a failure.
In mid-May I dragged her to a cultural club where, because Professor Galiani
had urged me to, I felt obliged to go to a talk by a scientist named Giuseppe
Montalenti.  It  was  the  first  time  we  had  had  an  experience  of  that  type:
Montalenti gave a kind of lesson, not for children but, rather, for the adults
who had come to hear him. We sat at the back of the bare room and I was
quickly  bored.  The  professor  had  sent  me  but  she  hadn’t  shown  up.  I
murmured to Lila, “Let’s go.” But Lila refused, she whispered that she wasn’t
bold enough to get up, she was afraid of disrupting the lecture. But it wasn’t
her type of worry; it was the sign of an unexpected submissiveness, or of an
interest that she didn’t want to admit. We stayed till the end. Montalenti talked
about Darwin; neither of us knew who Darwin was. As we left, I said jokingly,
“He said a thing that I already knew: you’re a monkey.”
But she didn’t want to joke: “I don’t want to ever forget it,” she said.
“That you’re a monkey?”
“That we’re animals.”
“You and I?”
“Everyone.”
“But he said there are a lot of differences between us and the apes.”
“Yes? Like what? That my mother pierced my ears and so I’ve worn earrings
since I was born, but the mothers of monkeys don’t, so their offspring don’t
wear earrings?”
A fit of laughter possessed us, as we listed differences, one after the other,
each more ridiculous than the last: we were enjoying ourselves. But when we
returned to the neighborhood our good mood vanished. We met Pasquale and
Ada taking a walk on the stradone and learned from them that Stefano was
looking everywhere for Lila, very upset. I offered to go home with her, she
refused. Instead she agreed to let Pasquale and Ada take her in the car.
I found out the next day why Stefano had been looking for her. It wasn’t
because we were late. It wasn’t even because he was annoyed that his wife
sometimes spent her free time with me and not with him. It was something
else. He had just learned that Pinuccia was often seen with Rino at his house.
He had just learned that the two were together in his bed, that Lila gave them
the keys. He had just learned that Pinuccia was pregnant. But what had most
infuriated him was that when he slapped his sister because of the disgusting
things  she  and  Rino  had  done,  Pinuccia  shouted  at  him,  “You’re  jealous
because I’m a woman and Lina isn’t, because Rino knows how to behave with
women  and  you  don’t.”  Lila,  seeing  him  so  upset,  listening  to  him—and
recalling the composure he had always shown when they were engaged—had
burst out laughing, and Stefano had gone for a drive, so as not to murder her.
According to her, he had gone to look for a prostitute.
33.
The preparations for Rino and Pinuccia’s wedding were carried out in a rush.
I was not much concerned with it, I had my final class essays, the final oral
exams. And then something else happened that caused me great agitation.
Professor  Galiani,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  violating  the  teachers’  code  of
behavior with indifference, invited me—me and no one else in the school—to
her house, to a party that her children were giving.
It was unusual enough that she lent me books and newspapers, that she had
directed me to a march for peace and a demanding lecture. Now she had gone
over the limit: she had taken me aside and given me that invitation. “Come as
you  like,”  she  had  said,  “alone  or  with  someone,  with  your  boyfriend  or
without: the important thing is to come.” Like that, a few days before the end
of the school year, without worrying about how much I had to study, without
worrying about the earthquake that it set off inside me.
I had immediately said yes, but I quickly discovered that I would never have
the courage to go. A party at any professor’s house was unthinkable, imagine at
the house of Professor Galiani. For me it was as if I were to present myself at
the royal palace, curtsey to the queen, dance with the princes. A great pleasure
but also an act of violence, like a yank: to be dragged by the arm, forced to do a
thing that, although it appeals to you, you know is not suitable—you know
that, if circumstances did not oblige you, you would happily avoid doing it.
Probably it didn’t even occur to Professor Galiani that I had nothing to wear. In
class  I  wore  a  shapeless  black  smock.  What  did  she  expect  there  was,  the
professor, under that smock: clothes and slips and underwear like hers? There
was inadequacy, rather, there was poverty, poor breeding. I possessed a single
pair of worn-out shoes. My only nice dress was the one I had worn to Lila’s
wedding, but now it was hot, the dress was fine for March but not for the end
of May. And yet the problem was not just what to wear. There was the solitude,
the awkwardness of being among strangers, kids with ways of talking among
themselves, joking, with tastes I didn’t know. I thought of asking Alfonso if he
would go with me, he was always kind to me. But—I recalled—Alfonso was a
schoolmate and Professor Galiani had addressed the invitation to me alone.
What to do? For days I was paralyzed by anxiety, I thought of talking to the
professor and coming up with some excuse. Then it occurred to me to ask Lila’s
advice.
She was as usual in a difficult period, she had a yellow bruise under one
cheekbone. She didn’t welcome the news.
“Why are you going there?”
“She invited me.”
“Where does this professor live?”
“Corso Vittorio Emanuele.”
“Can you see the sea from her house?”
“I don’t know.”
“What does her husband do?”
“A doctor at the Cotugno.”
“And the children are still in school?”
“I don’t know.”
“Do you want one of my dresses?”
“You know they don’t fit me.”
“You just have a bigger bust.”
“Everything of me is bigger, Lila.”
“Then I don’t know what to tell you.”
“I shouldn’t go?”
“It’s better.”
“O.K., I won’t go.”
She was visibly satisfied with that decision. I said goodbye, left the grocery,
turned onto a street where stunted oleander bushes grew. But I heard her
calling me, I turned back.
“I’ll go with you,” she said.
“Where?”
“To the party.”
“Stefano won’t let you.”
“We’ll see. Tell me if you want to take me or not.”
“Of course I want to.”
She  became  at  that  point  so  pleased  that  I  didn’t  dare  try  to  make  her
change her mind. But already on the way home I felt that my situation had
become worse. None of the obstacles that prevented me from going to the
party had been removed, and that offer of Lila’s confused me even more. The
reasons were tangled and I had no intention of enumerating them, but if I had I
would have been confronted by contradictory statements. I was afraid that
Stefano wouldn’t let her come. I was afraid that Stefano would let her. I was
afraid that she would dress in an ostentatious fashion, the way she had when
she went to the Solaras. I was afraid that, whatever she wore, her beauty would
explode like a star and everyone would be eager to grab a fragment of it. I was
afraid that she would express herself in dialect, that she would say something
vulgar, that it would become obvious that school for her had ended with an
elementary-school diploma. I was afraid that, if she merely opened her mouth,
everyone  would  be  hypnotized  by  her  intelligence  and  Professor  Galiani
herself would be entranced. I was afraid that the professor would find her both
presumptuous and naïve and would say to me: Who is this friend of yours, stop
seeing  her.  I  was  afraid  she  would  understand  that  I  was  only  Lila’s  pale
shadow and would be interested not in me any longer but in her, she would
want to see her again, she would undertake to make her go back to school.
For a while I avoided the grocery. I hoped that Lila would forget about the
party, that the day would come and I would go almost secretly, and then I
would tell her: you didn’t let me know. Instead she soon came to see me, which
she hadn’t done for a long time. She had persuaded Stefano not only to take us
but also to come and get us, and she wanted to know what time we were to be
at the professor’s house.
“What are you going to wear?” I asked anxiously.
“Whatever you wear.”
“I’m going to wear a blouse and skirt.”
“Then I will, too.”
“And Stefano is sure that he’ll take us and then come and get us?”
“Yes.”
“How did you persuade him?”
She made a face, cheerfully, saying that by now she knew how to handle
him. “If I want something,” she whispered, as if she herself didn’t want to hear,
“I just have to act a little like a whore.”
She  said  it  like  that,  in  dialect,  and  added  other  crude,  self-mocking
expressions, to make me understand the revulsion her husband provoked in
her, the disgust she felt at herself. My anxiety increased. I should tell her, I
thought, that I’m not going to the party, I should tell her that I changed my
mind. I knew, naturally, that behind the appearance of the disciplined Lila, at
work  from  morning  to  night,  there  was  a  Lila  who  was  anything  but
submissive; yet, in particular now that I was assuming the responsibility of
introducing  her  into  the  house  of  Professor  Galiani,  the  recalcitrant  Lila
frightened  me,  seemed  to  me  increasingly  spoiled  by  her  very  refusal  to
surrender. What would happen if, in the presence of the professor, something
made her rebel? What would happen if she decided to use the language she had
just used with me? I said cautiously: “There, please, don’t talk like that.”
She looked at me in bewilderment. “Like what?”
“Like now.”
She was silent for a moment, then she asked, “Are you ashamed of me?”
34.
I wasn’t ashamed of her, I swore it, but I hid from her the fact that I was
afraid of having to be ashamed of myself for it.
Stefano took us in the convertible to the professor’s house. I sat in the back,
the two of them in front, and for the first time I was struck by the massive
wedding rings on their hands, his and hers. While Lila wore a skirt and blouse,
as she had promised, nothing excessive, and no makeup except some lipstick,
he was dressed up, with a lot of gold, and a strong odor of shaving soap, as if he
expected that at the last moment we would say to him: You come, too. We
didn’t. I confined myself to thanking him warmly several times, Lila got out of
the car without saying goodbye. Stefano drove off with a painful screeching of
tires.
We were tempted by the elevator, but then decided against it. We had never
taken an elevator, not even Lila’s new building had one, we were afraid of
getting in trouble. Professor Galiani had said that her apartment was on the
fourth floor, that on the door it said “Dott. Prof. Frigerio,” but just the same we
checked the name plates on every floor. I went ahead, Lila behind, in silence,
flight after flight. How clean the building was, the doorknobs and the brass
nameplates gleamed. My heart was pounding.
We identified the door first of all by the loud music coming from it, by the
din of voices. We smoothed our skirts, I pulled down the slip that tended to rise
up my legs, Lila straightened her hair with her fingertips. Both of us, evidently,
were afraid of escaping ourselves, of erasing in a moment of distraction the
mask of self-possession we had given ourselves. I pressed the bell. We waited,
no one came to the door. I looked at Lila, I pressed the button again, longer.
Quick  footsteps,  the  door  opened.  A  dark  young  man  appeared,  small  in
stature, with a handsome face and a lively gaze. He appeared to be around
twenty. I said nervously that I was a student of Professor Galiani, and without
even letting me finish, he laughed, exclaimed, “Elena?”
“Yes.”
“In  this  house  we  all  know  you,  our  mother  never  misses  a  chance  to
torment us by reading us your papers.”
The boy’s name was Armando and that remark of his was decisive, it gave
me a sudden sense of power. I still remember him fondly, there in the doorway.
He  was  absolutely  the  first  person  to  show  me  in  a  practical  sense  how
comfortable it is to arrive in a strange, potentially hostile environment, and
discover that you have been preceded by your reputation, that you don’t have
to do anything to be accepted, that your name is known, that everyone knows
about you, and it’s the others, the strangers, who must strive to win your favor
and not you theirs. Used as I was to the absence of advantages, that unforeseen
advantage  gave  me  energy,  an  immediate  self-confidence.  My  anxieties
disappeared, I no longer worried about what Lila could or couldn’t do. In the
grip  of  my  unexpected  centrality,  I  even  forgot  to  introduce  my  friend  to
Armando, nor, on the other hand, did he seem to notice her. He led me in as if I
were alone, enthusiastically insisting on how much his mother talked about
me, on how she praised me. I followed, self-deprecatingly, Lila closed the door.
The apartment was big, the rooms open and bright, the ceilings high and
decorated with floral motifs. What struck me most was the books everywhere,
there were more books in that house than in the neighborhood library, entire
walls  covered  by  floor-to-ceiling  shelves.  And  music.  And  young  people
dancing freely in a large, brilliantly lighted room. And others talking, smoking.
All  of  whom  obviously  went  to  school,  and  had  parents  who  had  gone  to
school. Like Armando: his mother a teacher, his father a surgeon, though he
wasn’t there that evening. The boy led us onto a small terrace: warm air, large
sky, an intense odor of wisteria and roses mixed with that of vermouth and
marzipan. We saw the city sparkling with lights, the dark plane of the sea. The
professor called my name in greeting, it was she who reminded me of Lila
behind me.
“Is she a friend of yours?”
I  stammered  something,  I  realized  that  I  didn’t  know  how  to  make
introductions. “My professor. Her name is Lina. We went to elementary school
together,”  I  said.  Professor  Galiani  spoke  approvingly  of  long  friendships,
they’re important, an anchorage, generic phrases uttered as she stared at Lila,
who responded self-consciously in monosyllables, and who, when she realized
that the professor’s gaze had come to rest on the wedding ring, immediately
covered it with her other hand.
“Are you married?”
“Yes.”
“You’re the same age as Elena?”
“I’m two weeks older.”
Professor Galiani looked around, turned to her son: “Have you introduced
them to Nadia?”
“No.”
“What are you waiting for?”
“Take it easy, Mamma, they just got here.”
The professor said to me, “Nadia is really eager to meet you. This fellow here
is a rascal, don’t trust him, but she’s a good girl, you’ll see, you’ll be friends,
she’ll like you.”
We left her alone to smoke. Nadia, I understood, was Armando’s younger
sister: sixteen years of being a pain in the ass—he described her with feigned
animosity—she ruined my childhood. I jokingly alluded to the trouble that my
younger sister and brothers had always given me, and I turned to Lila for
confirmation, smiling. But she remained serious, she said nothing. We returned
to  the  room  with  the  dancers,  which  had  darkened.  A  Paul  Anka  song,  or
maybe “What a Sky,” who can remember anymore. The dancers held each
other close, faint flickering shadows. The music ended. Even before someone
reluctantly switched on the lights, I felt an explosion in my chest, I recognized
Nino Sarratore. He was lighting a cigarette, the flame leaped up into his face. I
hadn’t  seen  him  for  almost  a  year,  he  seemed  to  me  older,  taller,  more
disheveled, more handsome. Meanwhile the electric light flooded the room
and I also recognized the girl he had just stopped dancing with. She was the
same girl I had seen long ago outside school, the refined, luminous girl, who
had compelled me to comprehend my dullness.
“Here she is,” said Armando.
It was Nadia, the daughter of Professor Galiani.
35.
Odd as it may seem, that discovery did not spoil the pleasure of finding
myself there, in that house, among respectable people. I loved Nino, I had no
doubt, I never had any doubt about that. And of course I should have suffered
in the face of further proof that I would never have him. But I didn’t. That he
had a girlfriend, that the girlfriend was in every way better than me, I already
knew. The novelty was that it was the daughter of Professor Galiani, who had
grown up in that house, among those books. I immediately felt that the thing,
instead of grieving me, calmed me, further justified their choosing each other,
made it an inevitable movement, in harmony with the natural order of things.
In  other  words,  I  felt  as  if  suddenly  I  had  before  my  eyes  an  example  of
symmetry so perfect that I had to enjoy it in silence.
But it wasn’t only that. As soon as Armando said to his sister, “Nadia, this is
Elena, mamma’s student,” the girl blushed and impetuously threw her arms
around my neck, murmuring, “Elena, how happy I am to meet you.” Then,
without giving me time to say a single word, she went on to praise, without her
brother’s mocking tone, what I had written and how I wrote, in tones of such
enthusiasm that I felt the way I did when her mother read a theme of mine in
class. Or maybe it was even better, because there, present, listening to her,
were the people I most cared about, Nino and Lila, and both could observe that
in that house I was loved and respected.
I adopted a friendly demeanor that I had never considered myself capable of,
I immediately engaged in casual conversation, I came out with a fine, cultured
Italian that didn’t feel artificial, like the language I used at school. I asked Nino
about his trip to England, I asked Nadia what books she was reading, what
music she liked. I danced with Armando, with others, without a pause, even to
a rock-and-roll song, during which my glasses flew off my nose but didn’t
break. A miraculous evening. At one point I saw that Nino exchanged a few
words with Lila, invited her to dance. But she refused; she left the dancing
room, and I lost sight of her. A long time passed before I remembered my
friend. It took the slow waning of the dances, a passionate discussion between
Armando, Nino, and a couple of other boys their age, a move, along with Nadia,
to  the  terrace,  partly  because  of  the  heat  and  partly  to  bring  into  the
discussion Professor Galiani, who had stayed by herself, smoking and enjoying
the cool air. “Come on,” Armando said, taking me by the hand. I said, “I’ll get
my friend,” and I freed myself. All hot, I went through the rooms looking for
Lila. I found her alone in front of a wall of books.
“Come on, let’s go out on the terrace,” I said.
“To do what?”
“Cool off, talk.”
“You go.”
“Are you bored?”
“No, I’m looking at the books.”
“See how many there are?”
“Yes.”
I  felt  she  was  unhappy.  Because  she  had  been  neglected.  Fault  of  the
wedding ring, I thought. Or maybe her beauty isn’t recognized here, Nadia’s
counts more. Or perhaps it’s she who, although she has a husband, has been
pregnant,  had  a  miscarriage,  designed  shoes,  can  make  money—she  who
doesn’t know who she is in this house, doesn’t know how to be appreciated, the
way  she  is  in  the  neighborhood.  I  do.  Suddenly  I  felt  that  the  state  of
suspension that had begun the day of her wedding was over. I knew how to be
with  these  people,  I  felt  more  at  ease  than  I  did  with  my  friends  in  the
neighborhood.  The  only  anxiety  was  what  Lila  was  provoking  now  by  her
withdrawal, by remaining on the margins. I drew her away from the books,
dragged her onto the terrace.
While  many  of  the  guests  were  still  dancing,  a  small  group  had  formed
around the professor, three or four boys and two girls. Only the boys talked.
The sole woman who took part, and she did so with irony, was the professor. I
saw right away that the older boys, Nino, Armando and one called Carlo, found
it somehow improper to argue with her. They wished mainly to challenge each
other, considering her the authority, bestower of the palm of victory. Armando
expressed  opinions  contrary  to  his  mother’s  but  in  fact  he  was  addressing
Nino. Carlo agreed with the professor but in refuting the others he strove to
separate  his  arguments  from  hers.  And  Nino,  politely  disagreeing  with  the
professor,  contradicted  Armando,  contradicted  Carlo.  I  listened  spellbound.
Their words were buds that blossomed in my mind into more or less familiar
flowers,  and  then  I  flared  up,  mimicking  participation;  or  they  manifested
forms unknown to me, and I retreated, to hide my ignorance. In this second
case, however, I became nervous: I don’t know what they’re talking about, I
don’t know who this person is, I don’t understand. They were sounds without
sense, they demonstrated that the world of persons, events, ideas was endless,
and the reading I did at night had not been sufficient, I would have to work
even harder in order to be able to say to Nino, to Professor Galiani, to Carlo, to
Armando: Yes, I understand, I know. The entire planet is threatened. Nuclear
war. Colonialism, neocolonialism. The pieds-noirs, the O.A.S. and the National
Liberation  Front.  The  fury  of  mass  slaughters.  Gaullism,  Fascism.  France,
Armée,  Grandeur,  Honneur.  Sartre  is  a  pessimist,  but  he  counts  on  the
Communist workers in Paris. The wrong direction taken by France, by Italy.
Opening  to  the  left.  Saragat,  Nenni.  Fanfani  in  London,  Macmillan.  The
Christian Democratic congress in our city. The followers of Fanfani, Moro, the
Christian Democratic left. The socialists have ended up in the jaws of power.
We will be Communists, we with our proletariat and our parliamentarians, to
get the laws of the center left passed. If it goes like that, a Marxist-Leninist
party will become a social democracy. Did you see how Leone behaved at the
start of the academic year? Armando shook his head in disgust: Planning isn’t
going  to  change  the  world,  it  will  take  blood,  it  will  take  violence.  Nino
responded  calmly:  Planning  is  an  indispensable  tool.  The  talk  was  tense,
Professor  Galiani  kept  the  boys  at  bay.  How  much  they  knew,  they  were
masters of the earth. At some point Nino mentioned America favorably, he said
words in English as if he were English. I noticed that in the space of a year his
voice  had  grown  stronger,  it  was  thick,  almost  hoarse,  and  he  used  it  less
rigidly than he had at Lila’s wedding and, later, at school. He even spoke of
Beirut as if he had been there, and Danilo Dolci and Martin Luther King and
Bertrand Russell. He appeared to support an organization he called the World
Brigade for Peace and rebuked Armando when he referred to it sarcastically.
Then he grew excited, his voice rose. Ah, how handsome he was. He said that
the world had the technical capability to eliminate colonialism, hunger, war
from the face of the earth. I was overwhelmed by emotion as I listened, and,
although I felt lost in the midst of a thousand things I didn’t know—what were
Gaullism, the O.A.S., social democracy, the opening to the left; who were Danilo
Dolci, Bertrand Russell, the pieds-noirs, the followers of Fanfani; and what had
happened in Beirut, what in Algeria—I felt the need, as I had long ago, to take
care of him, to tend to him, to protect him, to sustain him in everything that
he would do in the course of his life. It was the only moment of the evening
when I felt envious of Nadia, who stood beside him like a minor but radiant
divinity.  Then  I  heard  myself  utter  sentences  as  if  it  were  not  I  who  had
decided  to  do  so,  as  if  another  person,  more  assured,  more  informed,  had
decided to speak through my mouth. I began without knowing what I would
say, but, hearing the boys, fragments of phrases read in Galiani’s books and
newspapers stirred in my mind, and the desire to speak, to make my presence
felt, became stronger than timidity. I used the elevated Italian I had practiced
in making translations from Greek and Latin. I was on Nino’s side. I said I didn’t
want  to  live  in  a  world  at  war.  We  mustn’t  repeat  the  mistakes  of  the
generations that preceded us, I said. Today we should make war on the atomic
arsenals, should make war on war itself. If we allow the use of those weapons,
we will all become even guiltier than the Nazis. Ah, how moved I was, as I
spoke: I felt tears coming to my eyes. I concluded by saying that the world
urgently needed to be changed, that there were too many tyrants who kept
peoples enslaved. But it should be changed by peaceful means.
I don’t know if everyone appreciated me. Armando seemed unhappy and a
blond girl whose name I didn’t know stared at me with a small, mocking smile.
But as I was speaking Nino nodded at me in agreement. And when Professor
Galiani, just afterward, gave her opinion, she referred to me twice, and it was
thrilling to hear, “As Elena rightly said.” It was Nadia, though, who did the
most wonderful thing. She left Nino and came over and whispered in my ear:
“How clever you are, how brave.” Lila, who was next to me, didn’t say a word.
But  while  the  professor  was  still  talking  to  me  she  gave  me  a  tug  and
whispered,  in  dialect,  “I’m  falling  asleep  on  my  feet,  find  out  where  the
telephone is and call Stefano?”
36.
How much that evening had hurt her I learned later from her notebooks.
She admitted that she had asked to go with me. She admitted she had thought
she  could  at  least  for  one  evening  get  away  from  the  grocery  and  be
comfortable  with  me,  share  in  that  sudden  widening  of  my  world,  meet
Professor Galiani, talk to her. She admitted she thought she would find a way
of making a good impression. She admitted she had been sure she would be
attractive to the males, she always was. Instead she immediately felt voiceless,
graceless, deprived of movement, of beauty. She listed details: even when we
were next to each other, people chose to speak only to me; they had brought
me pastries, a drink, no one had done anything for her; Armando had shown
me a family portrait, something from the seventeenth century, he had talked
to me about it for a quarter of an hour; she had been treated as if she weren’t
capable of understanding. They didn’t want her. They didn’t want to know
anything about what sort of person she was. That evening for the first time it
had become clear to her that her life would forever be Stefano, the grocery
stores,  the  marriage  of  her  brother  and  Pinuccia,  the  conversations  with
Pasquale and Carmen, the petty war with the Solaras. This she had written, and
more, maybe that very night, maybe in the morning, in the store. There, for
the entire evening, she had felt irrefutably lost.
But in the car, as we returned to the neighborhood, she didn’t allude in the
slightest to her feeling, she just became mean, treacherous. She began as soon
as she got in the car, when her husband asked resentfully if we had had a good
time. I let her answer, I was dazed by the effort, by excitement, by pleasure.
And then she went on slowly to hurt me. She said in dialect that she had never
been so bored in her life. It would have been better if we’d gone to a movie, she
apologized to her husband, and—it was unusual, done evidently on purpose to
wound me, to remind me: See, good or bad I have a man, while you’ve got
nothing, you’re a virgin, you know everything but you don’t know anything
about  this—she  caressed  the  hand  that  he  kept  on  the  gear  shift.  Even
watching  television,  she  said,  would  have  been  more  entertaining  than
spending  time  with  those  disgusting  people.  There’s  not  a  thing  there,  an
object, a painting, that was acquired by them directly. The furniture is from a
hundred years ago. The house is at least three hundred years old. The books
yes, some are new, but others are very old, they’re so dusty they haven’t been
opened  since  who  knows  when,  old  law  books,  history,  science,  politics.
They’ve  read  and  studied  in  that  house,  fathers,  grandfathers,  great-
grandfathers.  For  hundreds  of  years  they’ve  been,  at  the  least,  lawyers,
doctors, professors. So they all talk just so, so they dress and eat and move just
so. They do it because they were born there. But in their heads they don’t have
a thought that’s their own, that they struggled to think. They know everything
and  they  don’t  know  a  thing.  She  kissed  her  husband  on  the  neck,  she
smoothed his hair with her fingertips. If you were up there, Ste’, all you’d see is
parrots going cocorico, cocorico. You couldn’t understand a word of what they
were saying and they didn’t even understand each other. You know what the
O.A.S. is, you know what the opening to the left is? Next time, Lenù, don’t take
me,  take  Pasquale,  I’ll  show  you,  he’ll  put  them  in  their  place  in  a  flash.
Chimpanzees that piss and shit in the toilet instead of on the ground, and
that’s why they give themselves a lot of airs, and they say they know what
should be done in China and in Albania and in France and in Katanga. You, too,
Lenù, I have to tell you: Look out, or you’ll be the parrots’ parrot. She turned to
her husband, laughing. You should have heard her, she said. She made a little
voice, cheechee, cheechee. Show Stefano how you speak to those people? You
and Sarratore’s son: the same. The world brigade for peace; we have the technical
capability; hunger, war. But do you really work that hard in school so you can say
things just like he does? Whoever finds a solution to the problems is working for
peace. Bravo. Do you remember how the son of Sarratore was able to find a
solution: Do you remember, do you—and you pay attention to him? You, too,
you want to be a puppet from the neighborhood who performs so you can be
welcomed into the home of those people? You want to leave us alone in our
own shit, cracking our skulls, while all of you go cocorico cocorico, hunger, war,
working class, peace?
She was so spiteful, all the way home along Corso Vittorio Emanuele, that I
was silent, and felt the poison that was transforming what had seemed to me
an important moment of my life into a false step that had made me ridiculous. I
struggled  not  to  believe  her.  I  felt  she  was  truly  hostile  and  capable  of
anything.  She  knew  how  to  set  the  nerves  of  good  people  alight,  in  their
breasts she kindled the fire of destruction. I felt that Gigliola and Pinuccia were
right: it was she herself who in the photograph had blazed up like the devil. I
hated her, and even Stefano noticed, and when he stopped at the gate and let
me  out  on  his  side  he  said,  “Bye,  Lenù,  good  night,  Lina’s  joking,”  and  I
muttered  “Bye,”  and  went  in.  Only  when  the  car  had  left  did  I  hear  Lila
shouting  at  me,  re-creating  the  voice  that  in  her  view  I  had  deliberately
assumed at the Galiani house: “Bye, hey, bye.”
37.
That night began the long, painful period that led to our first break and a
long separation.
I had trouble recovering. There had been a thousand causes of tension up
until that moment; her unhappiness and, at the same time, her yearning to
dominate were constantly surfacing. But never, ever, ever had she so explicitly
set out to humiliate me. I stopped dropping in at the grocery. Although she had
paid for my schoolbooks, although we had made that bet, I didn’t tell her that I
had passed with all A’s and two A-pluses. Just after school ended, I started
working in a bookstore on Via Mezzocannone, and I disappeared from the
neighborhood without telling her. The memory of the sarcastic tone of that
night, instead of fading, became magnified, and my resentment, too, increased.
It seemed to me that nothing could justify what she had done to me. It never
occurred to me, as, in fact, it had on other occasions, that she had felt the need
to humiliate me in order to better endure her own humiliation.
I soon had confirmation that I really had made a good impression at the
party,  and  that  made  the  separation  easier.  I  was  wandering  along  Via
Mezzocannone during my lunch break when I heard someone call me. It was
Armando, on his way to take an exam. I learned that he was studying medicine
and that the exam was difficult but, just the same, before vanishing in the
direction of San Domenico Maggiore, he stopped to talk, piling on compliments
and starting in again on politics. In the evening he showed up in the bookstore,
he’d gotten a high mark, and was happy. He asked for my telephone number, I
said I didn’t have a telephone; he asked if we could go for a walk the following
Sunday, I said that on Sunday I had to help my mother in the house. He started
talking about Latin America, where he intended to go right after graduating, to
treat  the  destitute,  and  persuade  them  to  take  up  arms  against  their
oppressors, and he went on for so long that I had to send him away before the
owner got irritated. In other words, I was pleased because he obviously liked
me, and I was polite, but not available. Lila’s words had indeed done damage.
My clothes were wrong, my hair was wrong, my tone of voice was false, I was
ignorant. Besides, with the end of school, and without Professor Galiani, I had
lost the habit of reading the newspapers and, partly because money was tight, I
didn’t want to buy them out of my own pocket. Thus Naples, Italy, the world
quickly went back to being a foggy terrain in which I could no longer orient
myself. Armando talked, I nodded yes, but I understood little of what he was
saying.
The next day there was another surprise. While I was sweeping the floor of
the bookstore, Nino and Nadia appeared. They had heard from Armando where
I worked and had come just to say hello. They invited me to go to the movies
with them the following Sunday. I had to answer as I had answered Armando:
it wasn’t possible, I worked all week, and my mother and father wanted me
home on my day off.
“But a little walk in the neighborhood—you could do that?”
“That, yes.”
“So we’ll come see you.”
Since the owner was calling for me more impatiently than usual—he was a
man of around sixty, the skin on his face seemed dirty, he was irascible, and
had a dissolute look—they left right away.
Late in the morning on the following Sunday, I heard someone calling from
the  courtyard  and  I  recognized  Nino’s  voice.  I  looked  out,  he  was  alone.  I
quickly tried to make myself presentable and, without even telling my mother,
happy and at the same time anxious, I ran down. When I found myself before
him I could hardly breathe. “I only have ten minutes,” I said, and we didn’t go
out to walk along the stradone, but wandered among the houses. Why had he
come without Nadia? Why had he come all the way here if she couldn’t? He
answered my questions without my asking. Some relatives of Nadia’s father
were visiting and she had been obliged to stay home. He had wanted to see the
neighborhood again but also to bring me something to read, the latest issue of
a journal called Cronache Meridionali. He handed me the issue with a petulant
gesture, I thanked him, and he started, incongruously, to criticize the review,
and so I asked why he had decided to give it to me. “It’s rigid,” he said, and
added,  laughing,  “Like  Professor  Galiani  and  Armando.”  Then  he  turned
serious, he assumed a tone that was like an old man’s. He said that he owed a
great deal to our professor, that without her the period of high school would
have been a waste of time, but that you had to be on guard, keep her at a
distance. “Her greatest defect,” he said emphatically, “is that she can’t bear for
someone to have an opinion different from hers. Take from her everything she
can give you, but then go your own way.” Then he returned to the review, he
said  that  Galiani  also  wrote  for  it  and  suddenly,  with  no  connection,  he
mentioned Lila: “Then, if possible, have her read it, too.” I didn’t tell him that
Lila no longer read anything, that now she was Signora Carracci, that she had
kept only her meanness from when she was a child. I was evasive, and asked
about Nadia, he told me that she was taking a long car trip with her family, to
Norway, and then would spend the rest of the summer in Anacapri, where her
father had a family house.
“Will you go and see her?”
“Once or twice—I have to study.”
“How’s your mother?”
“Very well. She’s going back to Barano this year, she’s made up with the
woman who owns the house.”
“Will you go on vacation with your family?”
“I? With my father? Never ever. I’ll be on Ischia but on my own.”
“Where are you going?”
“I have a friend who has a house in Forio: his parents leave it to him for the
whole summer, and we’ll stay there and study. You?”
“I’m working at Mezzocannone until September.”
“Even during the mid-August holiday?”
“No, for the holiday, no.”
He smiled. “Then come to Forio, the house is big. Maybe Nadia will come for
two or three days.”
I smiled, nervously. To Forio? To Ischia? To a house without adults? Did he
remember the Maronti? Did he remember that we had kissed there? I said I had
to go in. “I’ll stop by again,” he promised. “I want to know what you think of
the review.” He added, in a low voice, his hands stuck in his pockets, “I like
talking to you.”
He  had  talked  a  lot,  in  fact.  I  was  proud,  thrilled,  that  he  had  felt
comfortable. I murmured, “Me, too,” although I had said little or nothing, and
was about to go in when something happened that disturbed us both. A cry cut
the Sunday quiet of the courtyard and I saw Melina at the window, waving her
arms,  trying  to  attract  our  attention.  When  Nino  also  turned  to  look,
perplexed, Melina cried even louder, a mixture of joy and anguish. She cried,
Donato.
“Who is it?” Nino asked.
“Melina,” I said, “do you remember?”
He made a grimace of uneasiness. “Is she angry with me?”
“I don’t know.”
“She’s saying Donato.”
“Yes.”
He turned again to look toward the window where the widow was leaning
out, repeatedly calling that name.
“Do you think I look like my father?”
“No.”
“Sure?”
“Yes.”
He said nervously, “I’ll go.”
“You’d better.”
He  left  quickly,  shoulders  bent,  while  Melina  cried  louder  and  louder,
increasingly agitated: Donato, Donato, Donato.
I also escaped, I went home with my heart pounding, and a thousand tangled
thoughts. Not a single feature of Nino’s connected him to Sarratore: not his
height, not his face, not his manners, not even his voice or his gaze. He was an
anomalous, sweet fruit. How fascinating he was with his long, untidy hair. How
different  from  any  other  male  form:  in  all  Naples  there  was  no  one  who
resembled him. And he had respect for me, even if I still had my last year of
high school to do and he was going to the university. He had come all the way
to the neighborhood on a Sunday. He had been worried about me, he had come
to put me on my guard. He had wanted to warn me that Professor Galiani was
all well and good but even she had her flaws, and meanwhile he had brought
me that journal in the conviction that I had the capacity to read it and discuss
it, and he had even gone so far as to invite me to Ischia, to Forio, for the August
holiday.  Something  impractical,  not  a  real  invitation,  he  himself  knew
perfectly well that my parents were not like Nadia’s, they would never let me
go; and yet he had invited me just the same, because in the words he said I
heard other words, unsaid, like I care a lot about seeing you, how I’d like to return to
our talks at the Port, at the Maronti. Yes, yes, I heard myself shouting in my head,
I’d like it, too, I’ll join you, in August I’ll run away, no matter what.
I hid the review among my books. But at night, as soon as I was in bed, I
looked at the table of contents and was startled. There was an article by Nino.
An article by him in that very serious-looking magazine: almost a book, not the
faded gray student magazine in which, two years earlier, he had suggested
publishing my account of the priest, but important pages written by adults for
adults. And yet there he was, Antonio Sarratore, name and last name. And I
knew him. And he was only two years older than me.
I read, I didn’t understand much, I reread. The article talked about Planning
with a capital “P,” Plan with a capital “P,” and it was written in a complicated
style. But it was a piece of his intelligence, a piece of his person, that, without
boasting, quietly, he had given to me.
To me.
Tears came to my eyes, it was late when I put the magazine down. Talk about
it to Lila? Lend it to her? No, it was mine. I didn’t want to have a real friendship
with her anymore, just hello, trite phrases. She didn’t know how to appreciate
me. Whereas others did: Armando, Nadia, Nino. They were my friends, to them
I  owed  my  confidences.  They  had  immediately  seen  in  me  what  she  had
hastened not to see. Because she had the gaze of the neighborhood. She was
able to see only the way Melina did, who, locked in her madness, saw Donato in
Nino, took him for her former lover.
38.
At first I didn’t want to go to Pinuccia and Rino’s wedding, but Pinuccia came
herself to bring me the invitation and since she treated me with exaggerated
affection, and in fact asked my advice about many things, I didn’t know how to
say no, even though she didn’t extend the invitation to the rest of my family.
It’s not me who’s discourteous, she apologized, but Stefano. Not only had her
brother refused to give her any of the family’s money so that she could buy a
house (he had told her that the investments he had made in the shoes and in
the new grocery had left him broke) but, since it was he who had to pay for the
wedding dress, the photographer, and the refreshments, he had personally
removed  half  the  neighborhood  from  the  guest  list.  It  was  extremely  rude
behavior, and Rino was even more embarrassed than she was. His bride would
have liked a wedding as lavish as his sister’s and a new house, like hers, with a
view of the railroad. Although he was by now the proprietor of a shoe factory,
he couldn’t manage with his own resources, but it was partly because he was a
spendthrift; he had just bought a Fiat 1100, he didn’t have a lira left. And so,
after a lot of resistance, they had agreed to go and live in Don Achille’s old
house, evicting Maria from the bedroom. They intended to save as much as
possible and, as soon as they could, buy an apartment nicer than Stefano and
Lila’s. My brother is a shit, Pinuccia said in conclusion, bitterly: when it comes
to his wife he throws his money around, while for his sister he doesn’t have a
cent.
I avoided any comment. I went to the wedding with Marisa and Alfonso; he
seemed to be just waiting for these worldly occasions to become someone else,
not my usual classmate but a young man graceful in manner and appearance,
with black hair, a heavy bluish beard showing on his cheeks, languid eyes, a
suit  that  wasn’t  ill-fitting,  as  happened  to  other  men,  but  showed  off  his
slender yet sculpted body.
In the hope that Nino would be obliged to take his sister, I had very carefully
studied  his  article  and  all  of  Cronache  Meridionali.  But  by  now  Alfonso  was
Marisa’s knight, he went to pick her up, he brought her home, and Nino didn’t
appear. I stayed close to the two of them, I wanted to avoid being alone with
Lila.
In the church I glimpsed her in the first row, between Stefano and Maria; she
was  so  beautiful,  it  was  impossible  to  avoid  looking  at  her.  Later,  at  the
wedding lunch, in the same restaurant on Via Orazio where her own reception
was held, scarcely more than a year earlier, we met just once and exchanged
wary words. Then I ended up at a table over on the side, with Alfonso, Marisa,
and a fair-haired boy around thirteen, while she sat with Stefano at the bride
and  bridegroom’s  table,  with  the  important  guests.  How  many  things  had
changed in a short time. Antonio wasn’t there, Enzo wasn’t there, both still
doing their military service. The clerks from the groceries, Carmen and Ada,
had been invited, but not Pasquale, or maybe he had chosen not to come, in
order not to mix with people whom, as local gossip had it, partly joking, partly
serious, he planned to murder with his own hands. His mother, Giuseppina
Peluso,  was  also  absent,  as  were  Melina  and  her  children.  Instead,  the
Carraccis,  the  Cerullos,  and  the  Solaras,  business  partners  in  various
combinations, all sat together at the head table, along with the relatives from
Florence, that is to say the metal merchant and his wife. I saw Lila talking to
Michele, laughing in an exaggerated fashion. Every so often she looked in my
direction,  but  I  immediately  turned  away,  with  a  mixture  of  irritation  and
distress. How much she laughed, too much. I thought of my mother: the way
Lila was playing the married woman, the vulgarity of her manners, her dialect.
She held Michele’s attention completely, though next to him was his fiancée,
Gigliola, pale and furious at being neglected. Only Marcello from time to time
spoke soothingly to his future sister-in-law. Lila, Lila: she wanted to exceed and
with her excesses make us all suffer. I noticed that Nunzia and Fernando also
gave their daughter long, apprehensive looks.
The day went smoothly, apart from two episodes that apparently had no
repercussions. Here’s the first. Among the guests was Gino, the pharmacist’s
son,  because  he  had  recently  become  engaged  to  a  second  cousin  of  the
Carraccis,  a  thin  girl  with  brown  hair  worn  close  to  her  head  and  violet
shadows under her eyes. As he got older he had become more detestable; I
couldn’t forgive myself for having been his girlfriend when I was younger. He
had been devious then, and he remained devious, and, besides, he was in a
situation that made him even more untrustworthy: he had failed his exams
again. He hadn’t even said hello to me for a long time, but he had continued to
hang around Alfonso, at times he was friendly, at others he teased him with
insults that always had sexual overtones. That day, maybe out of envy (Alfonso
had passed with good marks and, besides, was with Marisa, who was pretty,
whose  eyes  sparkled),  he  was  particularly  unbearable.  The  fair-haired  boy
seated  at  our  table,  who  was  nice-looking  and  very  shy,  was  the  son  of  a
relative of Nunzia’s who had emigrated to Germany and married a German. I
was very nervous and didn’t give him much encouragement to talk, but both
Alfonso  and  Marisa  had  tried  to  put  him  at  his  ease.  Alfonso  in  particular
engaged him in conversation, did all he could if the waiters neglected him, and
even took him out to the terrace for a view of the sea. Just as they came in and
returned to the table, joking, Gino, with a laugh, left his fiancée, who tried to
restrain him, and came to sit with us. He spoke to the boy in a low voice,
indicating Alfonso:
“Watch out for that guy, he’s a fag: this time he took you out to the terrace,
next time it’ll be the bathroom.”
Alfonso turned fiery red but didn’t react, he half-smiled, helplessly, and said
nothing. It was Marisa who got angry:
“How dare you say such a thing!”
“I dare because I know.”
“Tell me what you know.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“Then listen to what I’m telling you.”
“Go ahead.”
“My fiancée’s brother stayed at the Carraccis’ house once and had to sleep in
the same bed with him.”
“So?”
“He touched him.”
“He who?”
“Him.”
“Where’s your fiancée?”
“Here she is.”
“Tell that bitch I can prove that Alfonso likes girls, and I certainly don’t
know if she can say the same about you.”
And at that point she turned to her boyfriend and kissed him on the lips: a
passionate, public kiss—I would never have dared to do a thing like that in
front of all those people.
Lila, who continued to look in my direction as if she were monitoring me,
was the first to see that kiss and she clapped her hands with spontaneous
enthusiasm. Michele, too, applauded, laughing, and Stefano gave his brother a
vulgar  compliment,  which  was  immediately  expanded  on  by  the  metal
merchant. All sorts of banter, in other words, but Marisa pretended not to
notice. Squeezing Alfonso’s hand tightly—her knuckles were white—she hissed
at Gino, who had stared at the kiss with a blank expression, “Now get out of
here, or I’ll smack you.”
The pharmacist’s son got up without saying a word and went back to his
table, where his girlfriend immediately whispered in his ear with an aggressive
look. Marisa gave them both a last glance of contempt.
From that moment my opinion of her changed. I admired her courage, the
stubborn capacity for love, the seriousness of her attachment to Alfonso. Here
was another person I’ve neglected, I thought with regret, and wrongly so. How
much my dependence on Lila had closed my eyes. How frivolous her applause
had been, how it fit with the boorish amusement of Michele, of Stefano, of the
metal merchant.
The second episode had as its protagonist Lila herself. The reception was
now almost over. I had gotten up to go to the bathroom and was passing the
bridal table when I heard the wife of the metal merchant laughing loudly. I
turned. Pinuccia was standing and was shielding herself, because the woman
was pulling up her wedding dress, baring her large, strong legs, and saying to
Stefano, “Look at your sister’s thighs, look at that butt and that stomach. You
men of today like girls who resemble toilet brushes, but it’s the ones like our
Pinuccia whom God made just for bearing you children.”
Lila, who was bringing a glass to her mouth, without a second’s hesitation
threw  the  wine  in  her  face  and  on  her  silk  dress.  As  usual,  I  thought,
immediately anxious, she thinks she’s entitled to do anything, and now all
hell’s going to break loose. I went out to the bathroom, locked myself in, stayed
there as long as possible. I didn’t want to see Lila’s fury, I didn’t want to hear it.
I wanted to stay outside it, I was afraid of being dragged into her suffering, I
was  afraid  of  feeling  obligated,  out  of  long  habit,  to  ally  myself  with  her.
Instead, when I came out, everything was calm. Stefano was chatting with the
metal merchant and his wife, who was sitting stiffly in her stained dress. The
orchestra played, couples danced. Only Lila wasn’t there. I saw her outside the
glass doors, on the terrace. She was looking at the sea.
39.
I was tempted to join her, I immediately changed my mind. She must be very
upset and would surely be mean to me, which would make things even worse
between us. I decided to return to my table when Fernando, her father, came
up to me and asked timidly if I’d like to dance.
I didn’t dare refuse, we danced a waltz in silence. He led me confidently
around the room, among the tipsy couples, holding my hand too tight with his
sweaty hand. His wife must have entrusted him with the task of telling me
something important, but he couldn’t get up his courage. Finally, at the end of
the waltz, he muttered, addressing me, surprisingly, with formality: “If it’s not
too much trouble for you, talk to Lina a little, her mother is worried.” Then he
added awkwardly, “When you need shoes, come by, don’t stand on ceremony,”
and he returned quickly to his table.
That hint at a kind of reward for my possibly devoting time to Lila bothered
me. I asked Alfonso and Marisa to go, which they were happy to do. I felt
Nunzia’s gaze on me right up until we left the restaurant.
As the days passed, I began to lose confidence. I had thought that working in
a bookstore meant having a lot of books available to me and time to read them,
but I was unlucky. The owner treated me like a servant, he couldn’t stand my
being still for a moment: he forced me to unload boxes, pile them up, empty
them, arrange the new books, rearrange the old ones, dust them, and he sent
me  up  and  down  a  ladder  just  so  he  could  look  under  my  skirt.  Besides,
Armando, after that first foray when he had seemed so friendly, hadn’t showed
up again. And Nino hadn’t reappeared, either with Nadia or by himself. Had
their interest in me been so short-lived? I began to feel solitude, boredom. The
heat,  the  work,  disgust  at  the  bookseller’s  looks  and  his  coarse  remarks
depressed me. The hours dragged. What was I doing in that dark cave, while
along the sidewalk boys and girls filed past on their way to the mysterious
university building, a place where I would almost certainly never go? Where
was Nino? Had he gone to Ischia to study? He had left me the review, his
article, and I had studied them as if for an examination, but would he ever
come back to examine me? Where had I gone wrong? Had I been too reserved?
Was he expecting me to seek him out and for that reason did not look for me?
Should I talk to Alfonso, get in touch with Marisa, ask her about her brother?
And why? Nino had a girlfriend, Nadia: What point was there in asking his
sister where he was, what he was doing. I would make myself ridiculous.
Day by day the sense of myself that had so unexpectedly expanded after the
party diminished, I felt dispirited. Get up early, hurry to Mezzocannone, slave
all day, go home tired, the thousands of words learned in school packed into
my head, unusable. I got depressed not only when I recalled conversations with
Nino but also when I thought of the summers at the Sea Garden with the
stationer’s daughters, with Antonio. How stupidly our affair had ended, he was
the only person who had truly loved me, there would never be anyone else. In
bed at night, I recalled the odor of his skin, the meetings at the ponds, our
kissing and petting at the old canning factory.
I  was  in  this  state  of  discouragement  when,  one  evening,  after  dinner,
Carmen,  Ada,  and  Pasquale,  who  had  one  hand  bandaged  because  he  had
injured it at work, came looking for me. We got ice cream, and ate it in the
gardens.  Carmen,  coming  straight  to  the  point,  asked  me,  somewhat
aggressively, why I never stopped by the grocery anymore. I said I was working
at Mezzocannone and didn’t have time. Ada said, coldly, that if one is attached
to a person one finds the time, but if that’s how I was going to be, never mind. I
asked, “Be how?” and she answered, “You have no feelings, just look how you
treated my brother.” I reminded her with an angry snap that it was her brother
who had left me, and she replied, “Yes, anyone who believes that is lucky:
there are people who leave and people who know how to be left.” Carmen
agreed: “Also friendships,” she said. “You think they break off because of one
person and instead, if you look hard, it’s the other person’s fault.” At that point
I got upset, I declared, “Listen, if Lina and I aren’t friends anymore, it’s not my
fault.” Here Pasquale intervened, he said, “Lenù, it’s not important whose fault
it is, it’s important for us to support Lina.” He brought up the story of his bad
teeth, of how she had helped him, he talked about the money she still gave
Carmen under the counter, and how she also sent money to Antonio, who,
even if I didn’t know and didn’t want to know, was having a bad time in the
Army. I tried cautiously to ask what was happening to my old boyfriend and
they told me, in different tones of voice, some hostile, some less, that he had
had a nervous breakdown, that he was ill, but that he was tough, he wouldn’t
give in, he would make it. Lina, on the other hand.
“What’s wrong with Lina?”
“They want to take her to a doctor.”
“Who wants to take her?”
“Stefano, Pinuccia, relatives.”
“Why?”
“To find out why she’s only gotten pregnant once and then never again.”
“And she?”
“She acts like a madwoman, she doesn’t want to go.”
I shrugged my shoulders. “What can I do?”
“You take her.”
40.
I talked to Lila. She started laughing, she said she would go to the doctor
only if I swore that I wasn’t angry with her.
“All right.”
“Swear.”
“I swear.”
“Swear on your brothers, swear on Elisa.”
I said that going to the doctor wasn’t a big deal, but that if she didn’t want to
go I didn’t care, she should do as she liked. She became serious.
“You don’t swear, then.”
“No.”
She was silent for a moment, then she admitted, eyes lowered, “All right, I
was wrong.”
I made a grimace of irritation. “Go to the doctor and let me know.”
“You won’t come?”
“If I don’t go in the bookseller will fire me.”
“I’ll hire you,” she said ironically.
“Go to the doctor, Lila.”
Maria, Nunzia, and Pinuccia took her to the doctor. All three insisted on
being present at the examination. Lila was obedient, disciplined: she had never
submitted to that type of examination, and the whole time she kept her lips
pressed together, eyes wide. When the doctor, a very old man who had been
recommended  by  the  neighborhood  obstetrician,  said  knowingly  that
everything was in order, her mother and mother-in-law were relieved, but
Pinuccia darkened, asked: “Then why don’t children come and if they come
why aren’t they born?”
The doctor noticed her spiteful tone and frowned.
“She’s very young,” he said. “She needs to get a little stronger.”
Get stronger. I don’t know if the doctor used exactly that verb, yet that was
reported to me and it made an impression. It meant that Lila, in spite of the
strength she displayed at all times, was weak. It meant that children didn’t
come,  or  didn’t  last  in  her  womb,  not  because  she  possessed  a  mysterious
power  that  annihilated  them  but  because,  on  the  contrary,  she  was  an
inadequate woman. My resentment faded. When, in the courtyard, she told me
about the torture of the medical examination, using vulgar expressions for
both  the  doctor  and  the  three  who  accompanied  her,  I  gave  no  signs  of
annoyance but in fact took an interest: no doctor had ever examined me, not
even the obstetrician. Finally she said, sarcastically: “He tore me with a metal
instrument, I gave him a lot of money, and to reach what conclusion? That I
need strengthening.”
“Strengthening of what sort?”
“I’m supposed to go to the beach and go swimming.”
“I don’t understand.”
“The beach, Lenù, sun, salt water. It seems that if you go to the beach you
get stronger and children come.”
We said goodbye in a good mood. We had seen each other again and all in all
we had felt good.
She  came  back  the  next  day,  affectionate  toward  me,  irritated  with  her
husband. Stefano wanted to rent a house at Torre Annunziata and send her
there for all July and all August with Nunzia and Pinuccia, who also wanted to
get stronger, even though she didn’t need to. They were already thinking how
to manage with the shops. Alfonso would take care of Piazza dei Martiri, with
Gigliola, until school began, and Maria would replace Lila in the new grocery.
She said to me, desperate, “If I have to stay with my mother and Pinuccia for
two months I’ll kill myself.”
“But you’ll go swimming, lie in the sun.”
“I don’t like swimming and I don’t like lying in the sun.”
“If I could get stronger in your place, I’d leave tomorrow.”
She looked at me with curiosity, and said softly, “Then come with me.”
“I have to work at Mezzocannone.”
She became agitated, she repeated that she would hire me, but this time she
said it without irony. “Quit,” she began to press me, “and I’ll give you what the
bookseller gives you.” She wouldn’t stop, she said that if I agreed, it would all
become tolerable, even Pinuccia, with that bulging stomach that was already
showing.  I  refused  politely.  I  imagined  what  would  happen  in  those  two
months in the burning-hot house in Torre Annunziata: quarrels with Nunzia,
tears; quarrels with Stefano when he arrived on Saturday night; quarrels with
Rino  when  he  appeared  with  his  brother-in-law,  to  join  Pinuccia;  quarrels
especially with Pinuccia, continuous, muted or dramatic, sarcastic, malicious,
and full of outrageous insults.
“I can’t,” I said firmly. “My mother wouldn’t let me.”
She  went  away  angrily,  our  idyll  was  fragile.  The  next  morning,  to  my
surprise, Nino appeared in the bookstore, pale, thinner. He had had one exam
after another, four of them. I, who fantasized about the airy spaces behind the
walls of the university where well-prepared students and old sages discussed
Plato and Kepler all day, listened to him spellbound, saying only, “How clever
you  are.”  And  as  soon  as  the  moment  seemed  apt,  I  volubly  if  somewhat
inanely praised his article in Cronache Meridionali. He listened to me seriously,
without interrupting, so that at a certain point I no longer knew what to say to
show  him  that  I  knew  his  text  thoroughly.  Finally  he  seemed  content,  he
exclaimed that not even Professor Galiani, not even Armando, not even Nadia
had read it with such attention. And he started to talk to me about other essays
he had in mind on the same subject. I stood listening to him in the doorway of
the bookshop, pretending not to hear the owner calling me. After a shout that
was sharper than the others, Nino muttered, What does that shit want; he
stayed a little longer, with his insolent expression, and, saying that he was
leaving for Ischia the next day, held out his hand to me. I shook it—it was
slender,  delicate—and  he  immediately  drew  me  toward  him,  just  slightly,
leaned over, brushed my lips with his. It was a moment, then he left me with a
light gesture, a caress on the palm with his fingers, and went off toward the
Rettifilo. I stood watching as he walked away without turning, walked like a
distracted chieftain who feared nothing in the world because the world existed
only to submit to him.
That night I didn’t close my eyes. In the morning I got up early, I hurried to
the new grocery. I found Lila just as she was pulling up the gate, Carmen hadn’t
yet arrived. I said nothing about Nino, I said only, in the tone of someone who
is asking the impossible and knows it: “If you go to Ischia instead of Torre
Annunziata, I’ll quit and come with you.”
41.
We disembarked on the island the second Sunday in July, Stefano and Lila,
Rino and Pinuccia, Nunzia and I. The two men, loaded down with bags, were
apprehensive, like ancient heroes in an unknown land, uneasy without the
armor of their cars, unhappy that they had had to rise early and forgo the
neighborhood leisureliness of their day off. The wives, dressed in their Sunday
best, were annoyed with them but in different ways: Pinuccia because Rino was
too encumbered to pay attention to her, Lila because Stefano pretended to
know what he was doing and where he was going, when it was clear that he
didn’t. As for Nunzia, she had the appearance of someone who feels that she is
barely tolerated, and she was careful not to say anything inappropriate that
might annoy the young people. The only one who was truly content was me,
with a bag over my shoulder that held my few things, excited by the smells of
Ischia, the sounds, the colors that, as soon as I got off the boat, corresponded
precisely to the memories of that earlier vacation.
We arranged ourselves in two mini cabs, jammed-in bodies, sweat, luggage.
The house, rented in a hurry with the help of a salumi supplier of Ischian
origin,  was  on  the  road  that  led  to  a  place  called  Cuotto.  It  was  a  simple
structure and belonged to a cousin of the supplier, a thin woman, over sixty,
unmarried, who greeted us with brusque efficiency. Stefano and Rino dragged
the suitcases up a narrow staircase, joking but also cursing because of the
effort. The owner led us into shadowy rooms stuffed with sacred images and
small, glowing lamps. But when we opened the windows we saw, beyond the
road, beyond the vineyards, beyond the palms and pine trees, a long strip of
the  sea.  Or  rather:  the  bedrooms  that  Pinuccia  and  Lila  took—after  some
friction of the yours is bigger; no, yours is bigger type—faced the sea, while the
room that fell to Nunzia had a sort of porthole, high up, so that we never
discovered what was outside it, and mine, which was very small, and barely
had space for the bed, looked out on a chicken coop sheltered by a forest of
reeds.
There was nothing to eat in the house. On the advice of the owner we went
to  a  trattoria,  which  was  dark  and  had  no  other  customers.  We  sat  down
dubiously, just to get fed, but in the end even Nunzia, who was distrustful of all
cooking that was not her own, found that it was good and wanted to take
something home so that she could prepare dinner that evening. Stefano didn’t
make the slightest move to ask for the check, and, after a mute hesitation, Rino
resigned himself to paying for everyone. At that point we girls proposed going
to see the beach, but the two men resisted, yawned, said they were tired. We
insisted, especially Lila. “We ate too much,” she said, “it’ll do us good to walk,
the beach is right here, do you feel like it, Mamma?” Nunzia sided with the
men, and we returned to the house.
After a bored stroll through the rooms, both Stefano and Rino, almost in
unison, said that they wanted to have a little nap. They laughed, whispered to
each other, laughed again, and then nodded at their wives, who followed them
unwillingly into the bedrooms. Nunzia and I remained alone for a couple of
hours. We inspected the state of the kitchen, and found it dirty, which led
Nunzia to start washing everything carefully: plates, glasses, silverware, pots.
It was a struggle to get her to let me help. She asked me to keep track of a
number of urgent requests for the owner, and when she herself lost count of
the  things  that  were  needed,  she  marveled  that  I  was  able  to  remember
everything, saying, “That’s why you’re so clever at school.”
Finally the two couples reappeared, first Stefano and Lila, then Rino and
Pinuccia. I again proposed going to see the beach, but there was coffee, joking,
chatting, and Nunzia who began to cook, and Pinuccia who was clinging to
Rino,  making  him  feel  her  stomach,  murmuring,  stay,  leave  tomorrow
morning, and so the time flew and yet again we did nothing. In the end the
men had to rush, afraid of missing the ferry, and, cursing because they hadn’t
brought  their  cars,  had  to  find  someone  to  take  them  to  the  Port.  They
disappeared almost without saying goodbye. Pinuccia burst into tears.
In silence we girls began to unpack the bags, to arrange our things, while
Nunzia insisted on making the bathroom shine. Only when we were sure that
the men had not missed the ferry and would not return, did we relax, begin to
joke. We had ahead of us a long week and only ourselves to worry about.
Pinuccia said she was afraid of being alone in her room—there was an image of
a grieving Madonna with knives in her heart that sparkled in the lamplight—
and went to sleep with Lila. I shut myself in my little room to enjoy my secret:
Nino was in Forio, not far away, and maybe even the next day I would meet him on the
beach. I felt wild, reckless, but I was glad about it. There was a part of me that
was sick of being a sensible person.
It was hot, I opened the window. I listened to the chickens pecking, the
rustle of the reeds, then I became aware of the mosquitoes. I closed the window
quickly and spent at least an hour going after them and crushing them with
one of the books that Professor Galiani had lent me, Complete Plays, by a writer
named Samuel Beckett. I didn’t want Nino to see me on the beach with red
spots on my face and body; I didn’t want him to catch me with a book of plays—
for one thing, I had never set foot in a theater. I put aside Beckett, stained by
the black or bloody silhouettes of the mosquitoes, and began to read a very
complicated text on the idea of nationhood. I fell asleep reading.
42.
In the morning Nunzia, who felt committed to looking after us, went in
search of a place to do the shopping and we headed to the beach, the beach of
Citara, which for that entire long vacation we thought was called Cetara.
What pretty bathing suits Lila and Pinuccia displayed when they took off
their sundresses: one-piece, of course. The husbands, who as fiancés had been
indulgent, especially Stefano, now were against the two-piece; but the colors of
the new fabrics were shiny, and the shape of the neckline, front and back, ran
elegantly over their skin. I, under an old long-sleeved blue dress, wore the
same faded bathing suit, now shapeless, that Nella Incardo had made for me
years earlier, at Barano. I undressed reluctantly.
We walked a long way in the sun, until we saw steam rising from some
thermal baths, then turned back. Pinuccia and I stopped often to swim, Lila
didn’t, although she was there for that purpose. Of course, there was no Nino,
and I was disappointed, I had been convinced that he would show up, as if by a
miracle. When the other two wanted to go back to the house, I stayed on the
beach, and walked along the shore toward Forio. That night I was so sunburned
that I felt I had a high fever; the skin on my shoulders blistered and for the
next few days I had to stay in the house. I cleaned, cooked, and read, and my
energy pleased Nunzia, who couldn’t stop praising me. Every night, with the
excuse that I had been in the house all day to stay out of the sun, I made Lila
and Pina walk to Forio, which was some distance away. We wandered through
the town, had some ice cream. It’s pretty here, Pinuccia complained, it’s a
morgue  where  we  are.  But  for  me  Forio  was  also  a  morgue:  Nino  did  not
appear.
Toward the end of the week I proposed to Lila that we should visit Barano
and the Maronti. Lila agreed enthusiastically, and Pinuccia didn’t want to stay
and  be  bored  with  Nunzia.  We  left  early.  Under  our  dresses  we  wore  our
bathing suits, and in a bag I carried our towels, sandwiches, a bottle of water.
My stated purpose was to take advantage of that trip to say hello to Nella,
Maestra  Oliviero’s  cousin,  whom  I  had  stayed  with  during  my  summer  on
Ischia. The secret plan, instead, was to see the Sarratore family and get from
Marisa the address of the friend with whom Nino was staying in Forio. I was
naturally afraid of running into the father, Donato, but I hoped that he was at
work; and, in order to see the son, I was ready to run the risk of having to
endure some obscene remark from him.
When Nella opened the door and I stood before her, like a ghost, she was
stunned, tears came to her eyes. “It’s happiness,” she said, apologizing.
But it wasn’t only that. I had reminded her of her cousin, who, she told me,
wasn’t comfortable in Potenza, was ill and wasn’t getting better. She led us out
to  the  terrace,  offered  us  whatever  we  wanted,  was  very  concerned  with
Pinuccia, and her pregnancy. She made her sit down, wanted to touch her
stomach,  which  protruded  a  little.  Meanwhile  I  made  Lila  go  on  a  sort  of
pilgrimage: I showed her the corner of the terrace where I had spent so much
time in the sun, the place where I sat at the table, the corner where I made my
bed at night. For a fraction of a second I saw Donato leaning over me as he slid
his hand under the sheets, touched me. I felt revulsion but this didn’t keep me
from asking Nella casually, “And the Sarratores?”
“They’re at the beach.”
“How’s it going this year?”
“Ah, well . . . ”
“They’re too demanding?”
“Ever since he became more the journalist than the railroad worker, yes.”
“Is he here?”
“He’s on sick leave.”
“And is Marisa here?”
“No, not Marisa, but except for her they’re all here.”
“All?”
“You understand.”
“No, I swear, I don’t understand anything.”
She laughed heartily.
“Nino’s here today, too, Lenù. When he needs money he shows up for half a
day, then he goes back to stay with a friend who has a house in Forio.”
43.
We left Nella, and went down to the beach with our things. Lila teased me
mildly the whole way. “You’re sneaky,” she said, “you made me come to Ischia
just because Nino’s here, admit it.” I wouldn’t admit it, I defended myself. Then
Pinuccia joined her sister-in-law, in a coarser tone, and accused me of having
compelled  her  to  make  a  long  and  tiring  journey  to  Barano  for  my  own
purposes, without taking her pregnancy into account. From then on I denied it
even more firmly, and in fact I threatened them both. I promised that if they
said anything improper in the presence of the Sarratores I would take the boat
and return to Naples that night.
I immediately picked out the family. They were in exactly the same place
where they used to settle years before, and had the same umbrella, the same
bathing suits, the same bags, the same way of basking in the sun: Donato belly
up in the black sand, leaning on his elbows; his wife, Lidia, sitting on a towel
and  leafing  through  a  magazine.  To  my  great  disappointment  Nino  wasn’t
under  the  umbrella.  I  scanned  the  water,  and  glimpsed  a  dark  dot  that
appeared and disappeared on the rocking surface of the sea: I hoped it was
him. Then I announced myself, calling aloud to Pino, Clelia, and Ciro, who were
playing on the shore.
Ciro had grown; he didn’t recognize me, and smiled uncertainly. Pino and
Clelia ran toward me excitedly, and the parents turned to look, out of curiosity.
Lidia jumped up, shouting my name and waving, Sarratore hurried toward me
with a big welcoming smile and open arms. I avoided his embrace, saying only
Hello, how are you. They were very friendly, I introduced Lila and Pinuccia,
mentioned their parents, said whom they had married. Donato immediately
focused on the two girls. He began addressing them respectfully as Signora
Carracci and Signora Cerullo, he remembered them as children, he began, with
fatuous elaboration, to speak of time’s flight. I talked to Lidia, asked politely
about the children and especially Marisa. Pino, Clelia, and Ciro were doing well
and it was obvious; they immediately gathered around me, waiting for the
right moment to draw me into their games. As for Marisa, her mother said that
she had stayed in Naples with her aunt and uncle, she had to retake exams in
four subjects in September and had to go to private lessons. “Serves her right,”
she said darkly. “She didn’t work all year, now she deserves to suffer.”
I said nothing, but I doubted that Marisa was suffering: she would spend the
whole summer with Alfonso in the store in Piazza dei Martiri, and I was happy
for her. I noticed instead that Lidia bore deep traces of grief: in her face, which
was  losing  its  contours,  in  her  eyes,  in  her  shrunken  breast,  in  her  heavy
stomach. All the time we talked she was glancing fearfully at her husband,
who, playing the role of the kindly man, was devoting himself to Lila and
Pinuccia. She stopped paying attention to me and kept her eyes glued to him
when he offered to take them swimming, promising Lila that he would teach
her to swim. “I taught all my children,” we heard him say, “I’ll teach you, too.”
I never asked about Nino, nor did Lidia ever mention him. But now the black
dot in the sparkling blue of the sea stopped moving out. It reversed direction,
grew larger, I began to distinguish the white of the foam exploding beside it.
Yes, it’s him, I thought anxiously.
Nino emerged from the water looking with curiosity at his father, who was
holding Lila afloat with one arm and with the other was showing her what to
do. Even when he saw me and recognized me, he continued to frown.
“What are you doing here?” he asked.
“I’m on vacation,” I answered, “and I came by to see Signora Nella.”
He looked again with annoyance in the direction of his father and the two
girls.
“Isn’t that Lina?”
“Yes, and that’s her sister-in-law Pinuccia, I don’t know if you remember
her.”
He rubbed his hair with the towel, continuing to stare at the three in the
water. I told him almost breathlessly that we would be staying on Ischia until
September, that we had a house not far from Forio, that Lila’s mother was
there, too, that on Sunday the husbands of Lila and Pinuccia would come. As I
spoke it seemed to me that he wasn’t even listening, but still I said, and in spite
of Lidia’s presence, that on the weekend I had nothing to do.
“Come see us,” he said, and then he spoke to his mother: “I have to go.”
“Already?”
“I have things to do.”
“Elena’s here.”
Nino looked at me as if he had become aware of my presence only then. He
rummaged in his shirt, which was hanging on the umbrella, took out a pencil
and a notebook, wrote something, tore out the page, and handed it to me.
“I’m at this address,” he said.
Clear, decisive as a movie actor. I took the page as if it were a holy relic.
“Eat something first,” his mother begged him.
He didn’t answer.
“And at least wave goodbye to Papa.”
He changed out of his bathing suit, wrapping a towel around his waist, and
went off along the shore without saying goodbye to anyone.
44.
We spent the entire day at the Maronti, I playing and swimming with the
children, Pinuccia and Lila completely occupied by Donato, who took them for
a walk all the way to the thermal baths. At the end Pinuccia was exhausted, and
Sarratore showed us a convenient and pleasant way of going home. We went to
a hotel that was built practically over the water, as if on stilts, and there, for a
few lire, we got a boat, entrusting ourselves to an old sailor.
As soon as we set out, Lila said sarcastically, “Nino didn’t give you much
encouragement.”
“He had to study.”
“And he couldn’t even say hello?”
“That’s how he is.”
“How he is is rude,” Pinuccia interjected. “He’s as rude as the father is nice.”
They were both convinced that Nino hadn’t been polite or pleasant, and I let
them think it, I preferred prudently to keep my secrets. And it seemed to me
that if they thought he was disdainful of even a really good student like me,
they would more easily put up with the fact that he had ignored them and
maybe  they  would  even  forgive  him.  I  wanted  to  protect  him  from  their
rancor, and I succeeded: they seemed to forget about him right away, Pinuccia
was enthusiastic about Sarratore’s graciousness, and Lila said with satisfaction,
“He taught me to float, and even how to swim. He’s great.”
The sun was setting. I thought of Donato’s molestations, and shuddered.
From the violet sky came a chilly dampness. I said to Lila, “He’s the one who
wrote that the panel in the Piazza dei Martiri shop was ugly.”
Pinuccia had a smug expression of agreement.
Lila said, “He was right.”
I became upset. “And he’s the one who ruined Melina.”
Lila answered, with a laugh, “Or maybe he made her feel good for once.”
That  remark  wounded  me.  I  knew  what  Melina  had  endured,  what  her
children endured. I also knew Lidia’s sufferings, and how Sarratore, behind his
fine  manners,  hid  a  desire  that  respected  nothing  and  no  one.  Nor  had  I
forgotten that Lila, since she was a child, had witnessed the torments of the
widow Cappuccio and how painful it had been for her. So what was this tone,
what were those words—a signal to me? Did she want to say to me: you’re a
girl, you don’t know anything about a woman’s needs? I abruptly changed my
mind about the secrecy of my secrets. I wanted immediately to show that I was
a woman like them and knew.
“Nino gave me his address,” I said to Lila. “If you don’t mind, when Stefano
and Rino come I’m going to see him.”
Address. Go see him. Bold formulations. Lila narrowed her eyes, a sharp line
crossed her forehead. Pinuccia had a malicious look, she touched Lila’s knee,
she  laughed:  “You  hear?  Lenuccia  has  a  date  tomorrow.  And  she  has  the
address.”
I flushed.
“Well, if you’re with your husbands, what am I supposed to do?”
For a long moment there was only the noise of the engine and the mute
presence of the sailor at the helm.
Lila said coldly, “Keep Mamma company. I didn’t bring you here to have
fun.”
I restrained myself. We had had a week of freedom. That day, besides, both
she and Pinuccia, on the beach, in the sun, during long swims, and thanks to
the words that Sarratore knew how to use to inspire laughter and to charm,
had forgotten themselves. Donato had made them feel like girl-women in the
care  of  an  unusual  father,  the  rare  father  who  doesn’t  punish  you  but
encourages you to express your desires without guilt. And now that the day
was over I, in declaring that I would have a Sunday to myself with a university
student—what was I doing, was I reminding them both that that week in which
their condition as wives was suspended was over and that their husbands were
about to reappear? Yes, I had overdone it. Cut out your tongue, I thought.
45.
The husbands, in fact, arrived early. They were expected Sunday morning,
but they appeared Saturday evening, very excited, with Lambrettas that they
had, I think, rented at the Ischia Port. Nunzia prepared a lavish dinner. There
was talk of the neighborhood, of the stores, of how the new shoes were coming
along. Rino was full of self-praise for the models that he was perfecting with
his father, but at an opportune moment he thrust some sketches under Lila’s
nose,  and  she  examined  them  reluctantly,  suggesting  some  modifications.
Then we sat down at the table, and the two young men gorged themselves,
competing to see who could eat more. It wasn’t even ten when they dragged
their wives to the bedrooms.
I helped Nunzia clear and wash the dishes. Then I shut myself in my room, I
read a little. The heat in the closed room was suffocating, but I was afraid of
the blotches I’d get from the mosquito bites, and I didn’t open the window. I
tossed and turned in the bed, soaked with sweat: I thought of Lila, of how,
slowly, she had yielded. Certainly, she didn’t show any particular affection for
her husband; and the tenderness that I had sometimes seen in her gestures
when they were engaged had disappeared. During dinner she had frequently
commented  with  disgust  at  the  way  Stefano  gobbled  his  food,  the  way  he
drank; but it was evident that some equilibrium, who knows how precarious,
had been reached. When he, after some allusive remarks, headed toward the
bedroom, Lila followed without delay, without saying go on, I’ll join you later;
she was resigned to an inevitable routine. Between her and her husband there
was not the carnival spirit displayed by Rino and Pinuccia, but there was no
resistance, either. Deep into the night I heard the noise of the two couples, the
laughter and the sighs, the doors opening, the water coming out of the tap, the
whirlpool of the flush, the doors closing. Finally I fell asleep.
On Sunday I had breakfast with Nunzia. I waited until ten for any of them to
emerge; they didn’t, I went to the beach. I stayed until noon and no one came. I
went back to the house, Nunzia told me that the two couples had gone for a
tour of the island on the Lambrettas, advising us not to wait for them for lunch.
In fact they returned around three, slightly drunk, sunburned, all four full of
enthusiasm for Casamicciola, Lacco Ameno, Forio. The two girls had shining
eyes and immediately glanced at me slyly.
“Lenù,” Pinuccia almost shouted, “guess what happened.”
“What.”
“We met Nino on the beach,” Lila said.
My heart stopped.
“Oh.”
“My goodness, he is really a good swimmer,” Pinuccia said excitedly, cutting
the air with exaggerated arm strokes.
And Rino: “He’s not unlikable: he was interested in how shoes are made.”
And  Stefano:  “He  has  a  friend  named  Soccavo  and  he’s  the  mortadella
Soccavo: his father owns a sausage factory in San Giovanni a Teduccio.”
And Rino again: “That guy’s got money.”
And again Stefano: “Forget the student, Lenù, he doesn’t have a lira: aim for
Soccavo, you’d be better off.”
After a little more joking (Would you look at that, Lenuccia is about to be the
richest of all, She seems like a good girl and yet), they withdrew again into the
bedrooms.
I was incredibly disappointed. They had met Nino, gone swimming with him,
talked to him, and without me. I put on my best dress—the same one, the one
I’d worn to the wedding, even though it was hot—I carefully combed my hair,
which had become very blond in the sun, and told Nunzia I was going for a
walk.
I walked to Forio, uneasy because of the long, solitary distance, because of
the heat, because of the uncertain result of my undertaking. I tracked down
the address of Nino’s friend, I called several times from the street, fearful that
he wouldn’t answer.
“Nino, Nino.”
He looked out.
“Come up.”
“I’ll wait here.”
I waited, I was afraid that he would treat me rudely. Instead he came out of
the doorway with an unusually friendly expression. How disturbing his angular
face was. And how pleasantly crushed I felt confronted by his long profile, his
broad shoulders and narrow chest, that taut skin, the sole, dark covering of his
thinness, merely bones, muscles, tendons. He said his friend would join us
later; we walked through the center of Forio, amid the Sunday market stalls.
He asked me about the bookstore on Mezzocannone. I told him that Lila had
asked me to go with her on vacation and so I had quit. I didn’t mention the fact
that she was giving me money, as if going with her were a job, as if I were her
employee. I asked him about Nadia, he said only: “Everything’s fine.” “Do you
write  to  each  other?”  “Yes.”  “Every  day?”  “Every  week.”  That  was  our
conversation, already we had nothing more of our selves to share. We don’t
know anything about each other, I thought. Maybe I could ask how relations
are with his father, but in what tone? And, besides, didn’t I see with my own
eyes that they’re bad? Silence: I felt awkward.
But he promptly shifted onto the only terrain that seemed to justify our
meeting. He said that he was glad to see me, all he could talk about with his
friend  was  soccer  and  exam  subjects.  He  praised  me.  Professor  Galiani
perceived it, he said, you’re the only girl in the school who has any curiosity
about things that aren’t useful for exams and grades. He started to speak about
serious  subjects,  we  resorted  immediately  to  a  fine,  impassioned  Italian  in
which we knew we excelled. He started off with the problem of violence. He
mentioned a peace demonstration in Cortona and related it skillfully to the
beatings  that  had  taken  place  in  a  piazza  in  Turin.  He  said  he  wanted  to
understand more about the link between immigration and industry. I agreed,
but what did I know about those things? Nothing. Nino realized it, and he told
me in great detail about an uprising of young southerners and the harshness
with which the police had repressed them. “They call them napoli, they call
them Moroccans, they call them Fascists, provocateurs, anarcho-syndicalists.
But really they are boys whom no institution cares about, so neglected that
when they get angry they destroy everything.” Searching for something to say
that would please him, I ventured, “If you don’t have a solid knowledge of the
problems and if you don’t find lasting solutions, then naturally violence breaks
out. But the people who rebel aren’t to blame, it’s the ones who don’t know
how to govern.” He gave me an admiring look, and said, “That’s exactly what I
think.”
I  was  really  pleased.  I  felt  encouraged  and  cautiously  went  on  to  some
reflections  on  how  to  reconcile  individuality  and  universality,  drawing  on
Rousseau and other memories of the readings imposed by Professor Galiani.
Then I asked, “Have you read Federico Chabod?”
I mentioned that name because he was the author of the book on the idea of
nationhood that I had read a few pages of. I didn’t know anything else, but at
school I had learned to give the impression that I knew a lot. Have you read
Federico Chabod? It was the only moment when Nino seemed to be annoyed. I
realized  that  he  didn’t  know  who  Chabod  was  and  from  that  I  got  an
electrifying sensation of fullness. I began to summarize the little I had learned,
but I quickly realized that to know, to compulsively display what he knew, was
his point of strength and at the same time his weakness. He felt strong if he
took the lead and weak if he lacked words. He darkened, in fact he stopped me
almost immediately. He sidetracked the conversation, he started talking about
the Regions, about how urgent it was to get them approved, about autonomy
and decentralization, about economic planning on a regional basis, all things I
had never heard a word about. No Chabod, then: I left him the field. And I liked
to hear him talk, read the passion in his face. His eyes brightened when he was
excited.
We went on like that for at least an hour. Isolated from the shouting around
us, its coarse dialect, we felt exclusive, he and I alone, with our vigilant Italian,
with those conversations that mattered to us and no one else. What were we
doing? A discussion? Practicing for future confrontations with people who had
learned to use words as we had? An exchange of signals to prove to ourselves
that such words were the basis of a long and fruitful friendship? A cultivated
screen for sexual desire? I don’t know. I certainly had no particular passion for
those  subjects,  for  the  real  things  and  people  they  referred  to.  I  had  no
training, no habit, only the usual desire not to make a bad showing. It was
wonderful, though—that is certain. I felt the way I did at the end of the year
when I saw the list of my grades and read: passed. But I also understood that
there was no comparison with the exchanges I had had with Lila years earlier,
which ignited my brain, and in the course of which we tore the words from
each  other’s  mouth,  creating  an  excitement  that  seemed  like  a  storm  of
electrical charges. With Nino it was different. I felt that I had to pay attention
to say what he wanted me to say, hiding from him both my ignorance and the
few things that I knew and he didn’t. I did this, and felt proud that he was
trusting me with his convictions. But now something else happened. Suddenly
he said, That’s enough, grabbed my hand, exclaimed, like a fluorescent caption,
Now I’ll take you to see a landscape that you’ll never forget, and dragged me to
Piazza del Soccorso, without letting go, rather, he entwined his fingers in mine,
so that, overwhelmed as I was by his clasp, I preserve no memory of the arc of
the deep blue sea.
It  truly  overwhelmed  me.  Once  or  twice  he  disentangled  his  fingers  to
smooth his hair, but he immediately took my hand again. I wondered for a
moment how he reconciled that intimate gesture with his bond with Professor
Galiani’s daughter. Maybe for him, I answered, it’s merely how he thinks of the
friendship between male and female. But the kiss on Via Mezzocannone? That,
too, was nothing, new customs, new habits of youth; and anyway so slight, just
the briefest contact. I should be satisfied with the happiness of right now, the
chance of this vacation that I wanted: later I’ll lose him, he’ll leave, he has a
destiny that can in no way be mine, too.
I was absorbed by these throbbing thoughts when I heard a roar behind me
and noisy cries of my name. Rino and Stefano passed us at full speed on their
Lambrettas, with their wives behind. They slowed down, turned back with a
skillful maneuver. I let go of Nino’s hand.
“And your friend?” Stefano asked, revving his engine.
“He’ll be here soon.”
“Say hello from me.”
“Yes.”
Rino asked, “Do you want to take Lenuccia for a spin?”
“No, thanks.”
“Come on, you see she’d like to.”
Nino flushed, he said, “I don’t know how to ride a Lambretta.”
“It’s easy, like a bicycle.”
“I know, but it’s not for me.”
Stefano laughed: “Rinù, he’s a guy who studies, forget it.”
I had never seen him so lighthearted. Lila sat close against him, with both
arms around his waist. She urged him, “Let’s go, if you don’t hurry you’ll miss
the boat.”
“Yes,  let’s  go,”  cried  Stefano,  “tomorrow  we  have  to  work:  not  like  you
people who sit in the sun and go swimming. Bye, Lenù, bye, Nino, be good boys
and girls.”
“Nice to meet you,” Rino said cordially.
They  went  off,  Lila  waved  goodbye  to  Nino,  shouting,  “Please,  take  her
home.”
She’s acting like my mother, I thought with a little annoyance, she’s playing
grownup.
Nino took me by the hand again and said, “Rino is nice, but why did Lina
marry that moron?”
46.
A little later I also met his friend, Bruno Soccavo, who was around twenty,
and  very  short,  with  a  low  forehead,  black  curly  hair,  a  pleasant  face  but
scarred by what must have been severe acne.
They walked me home, beside the wine-colored sea of twilight. Nino didn’t
take my hand again, even though Bruno left us practically alone: he went in
front or lingered behind, as if he didn’t want to disturb us. Since Soccavo never
said a word to me, I didn’t speak to him, either, his shyness made me shy. But
when we parted, at the house, it was he who asked suddenly, “Will we meet
tomorrow?” And Nino found out where we were going to the beach, he insisted
on precise directions. I gave them.
“Are you going in the morning or the afternoon?”
“Morning and afternoon. Lina is supposed to swim a lot.”
He promised they would come and see us.
I ran happily up the stairs of the house, but as soon as I came in Pinuccia
began to tease me.
“Mamma,” she said to Nunzia during dinner, “Lenuccia’s going out with the
poet’s  son,  a  skinny  fellow  with  long  hair,  who  thinks  he’s  better  than
everybody.”
“It’s not true.”
“It’s very true, we saw you holding hands.”
Nunzia didn’t understand the teasing and took the thing with the earnest
gravity that characterized her.
“What does Sarratore’s son do?”
“University student.”
“Then if you love each other you’ll have to wait.”
“There’s nothing to wait for, Signora Nunzia, we’re only friends.”
“But if, let’s say, you should happen to become engaged, he’ll have to finish
his studies first, then he’ll have to find a job that’s worthy of him, and only
when he’s found something will you be able to get married.”
Here Lila interrupted, amused: “She’s telling you you’ll get moldy.”
But Nunzia reproached her: “You mustn’t speak like that to Lenuccia.” And
to console me she said that she had married Fernando at twenty-one, that she
had had Rino at twenty-three. Then she turned to her daughter, and said,
without malice, only to point out how things stood, “You, on the other hand,
were married too young.” That comment infuriated Lila and she went to her
room. When Pinuccia knocked on the door, to go in to sleep, she yelled not to
bother her, “you have your room.” How in that atmosphere could I say: Nino
and Bruno promised they’ll come and see me on the beach? I gave it up. If it
happens, I thought, fine, and if it doesn’t why tell them. Nunzia, meanwhile,
patiently invited her daughter-in-law into her bed, telling her not to be upset
by her daughter’s nerves.
The night wasn’t enough to soothe Lila. On Monday she got up in a worse
mood than when she had gone to bed. It’s the absence of her husband, Nunzia
said apologetically, but neither Pinuccia nor I believed it. I soon discovered
that she was angry mainly at me. On the road to the beach she made me carry
her bag, and once we were at the beach she sent me back twice, first to get her
a  scarf,  then  because  she  needed  some  nail  scissors.  When  I  gave  signs  of
protest she nearly reminded me of the money she was giving me. She stopped
in time, but not so that I didn’t understand: it was like when someone is about
to hit you and then doesn’t.
It was a very hot day; we stayed in the water. Lila practiced hard to keep
afloat, and made me stand next to her so that I could hold her up if necessary.
Yet her spitefulness continued. She kept reproaching me, she said that it was
stupid to trust me: I didn’t even know how to swim, how could I teach her. She
missed Sarratore’s talents as an instructor, she made me swear that the next
day we would go back to the Maronti. Still, by trial and error, she made a lot of
progress. She learned every movement instantly. Thanks to that ability she
had learned to make shoes, to dexterously slice salami and provolone, to cheat
on  the  weight.  She  was  born  like  that,  she  could  have  learned  the  art  of
engraving merely by studying the gestures of a goldsmith, and then been able
to work the gold better than he. Already she had stopped gasping for breath,
and was forcing composure on every motion: it was as if she were drawing her
body on the transparent surface of the sea. Long, slender arms and legs hit the
water  in  a  tranquil  rhythm,  without  raising  foam  like  Nino,  without  the
ostentatious tension of Sarratore the father.
“Is this right?”
“Yes.”
It  was  true.  In  a  few  hours  she  could  swim  better  than  I  could,  not  to
mention Pinuccia, and already she was making fun of our clumsiness.
That bullying air dissipated abruptly when, around four in the afternoon,
Nino, who was very tall, and Bruno, who came up to his shoulders, appeared on
the beach, just as a cool wind rose, taking away the desire to swim.
Pinuccia was the first to make them out as they advanced along the shore,
among the children playing with shovels and pails. She burst out laughing in
surprise and said: Look who’s coming, the long and the short of it. Nino and his
friend,  towels  over  their  shoulder,  cigarettes  and  lighters,  advanced
deliberately, looking for us among the bathers.
I had a sudden sense of power, I shouted, I waved to signal our presence. So
Nino had kept his promise. So he had felt, already, the next day, the need to see
me  again.  So  he  had  come  purposely  from  Forio,  dragging  along  his  mute
companion, and since he had nothing in common with Lila and Pinuccia, it was
obvious that he had taken that walk just for me, who alone was not married, or
even engaged. I felt happy, and the more my happiness seemed justified—Nino
spread his towel next to me, he sat down, he pointed to an edge of the blue
fabric, and I, who was the only one sitting on the sand, quickly moved over—
the more cordial and talkative I became.
Lila and Pinuccia instead were silent. They stopped teasing me, they stopped
squabbling with  each other;  they listened  to  Nino as  he told  funny  stories
about how he and his friend had organized their life of study.
It was a while before Pinuccia ventured a few words, in a mixture of dialect
and Italian. She said the water was nice and warm, that the man who sold fresh
coconut hadn’t come by yet, that she had a great desire for some. But Nino paid
little attention, absorbed in his witty stories, and it was Bruno, more attentive,
who felt it his duty not to ignore what a pregnant woman was saying: worried
that the child might be born with a craving for coconut, he offered to go in
search of some. Pinuccia liked his voice, choked by shyness but kind, the voice
of a person who doesn’t want to hurt anyone, and she eagerly began chatting
with him, in a low voice, as if not to disturb.
Lila, however, remained silent. She took little interest in the platitudes that
Pinuccia and Bruno were exchanging, but she didn’t miss a word of what Nino
and I were saying. That attention made me uneasy, and a few times I said I
would be glad to take a walk to the fumaroles, hoping that Nino would say: let’s
go. But he had just begun to talk about the construction chaos on Ischia, so he
agreed mechanically, then continued talking anyway. He dragged Bruno into
it, maybe upset by the fact that he was talking to Pinuccia, and called on him as
a witness to certain eyesores right next to his parents’ house. Nino had a great
need to express himself, to summarize his reading, to give shape to what he
had himself observed. It was his way of putting his thoughts in order—talk,
talk, talk—but certainly, I thought, also a sign of solitude. I proudly felt that I
was like him, with the same desire to give myself an educated identity, to
impose it, to say: Here’s what I know, here’s what I’m going to be. But Nino
didn’t leave me space to do it, even if occasionally, I have to say, I tried. I sat
and listened to him, like the others, and when Pinuccia and Bruno exclaimed,
“All right, we’re going for a walk now, we’re going to look for coconut,” I gazed
insistently at Lila, hoping that she would go with her sister-in-law, leaving me
and Nino finally alone to face each other, side by side, on the same towel. But
she didn’t breathe, and when Pina realized that she was compelled to go for a
walk by herself with a young man who was polite but nevertheless unknown,
she  asked  me,  in  annoyance,  “Lenù,  come  on,  don’t  you  want  to  walk?”  I
answered, “Yes, but let us finish our conversation, then maybe we’ll join you.”
And she, displeased, went with Bruno toward the fumaroles: they were exactly
the same height.
We continued to talk about how Naples and Ischia and all Campania had
ended up in the hands of the worst people, who acted like the best people.
“Marauders,”  Nino  called  them,  his  voice  rising,  “destroyers,  bloodsuckers,
people who steal suitcases of money and don’t pay taxes: builders, lawyers for
builders, Camorrists, monarcho-fascists, and Christian Democrats who behave
as if cement were mixed in Heaven, and God himself, with an enormous trowel,
were throwing blocks of it on the hills, on the coasts.” But that the three of us
were talking is an exaggeration. It was mainly he who talked, every so often I
threw in some fact I had read in Cronache Meridionali. As for Lila, she spoke only
once, and cautiously, when in the list of villains he included shopkeepers.
She asked, “Who are shopkeepers?”
Nino stopped in the middle of a sentence, looked at her in astonishment.
“Tradesmen.”
“And why do you call them shopkeepers?”
“That’s what they’re called.”
“My husband is a shopkeeper.”
“I didn’t mean to offend you.”
“I’m not offended.”
“Do you pay taxes?”
“I’ve never heard of them till now.”
“Really?”
“Yes.”
“Taxes are important for planning the economic life of a community.”
“If you say so. You remember Pasquale Peluso?”
“No.”
“He’s a construction worker. Without all that cement he would lose his job.”
“Ah.”
“But he’s a Communist. His father, also a Communist, in the court’s opinion
murdered my father-in-law, who had made money on the black market and as
a  loan  shark.  And  Pasquale  is  like  his  father,  he  has  never  agreed  on  the
question of peace, not even with the Communists, his comrades. But, even
though my husband’s money comes directly from my father-in-law’s money,
Pasquale and I are close friends.”
“I don’t understand what you’re getting at.”
Lila made a self-mocking face.
“I don’t, either, I was hoping to understand by listening to the two of you.”
That  was  it,  she  said  nothing  else.  But  in  speaking  she  hadn’t  used  her
normal aggressive tone of voice, she seriously seemed to want us to help her
understand, since the life of the neighborhood was a tangled skein. She had
spoken in dialect most of the time, as if to indicate, modestly: I don’t use tricks,
I speak as I am. And she had summarized disparate things frankly, without
seeking, as she usually did, a thread that would hold them together. And in fact
neither she nor I had ever heard that word-formula loaded with cultural and
political contempt: shopkeepers. And in fact neither she nor I knew anything
about taxes: our parents, friends, boyfriends, husbands, relatives acted as if
they didn’t exist, and school taught nothing that had to do even vaguely with
politics. Yet Lila still managed to disrupt what had until that moment been a
new and thrilling afternoon. Right after that exchange, Nino tried to return to
his subject but he faltered, he went back to telling funny anecdotes about life
with Bruno. He said they ate only fried eggs and salami, he said that they drank
a lot of wine. Then he seemed embarrassed by his own stories and appeared
relieved when Pinuccia and Bruno, their hair wet, came back, eating coconut.
“That was really fun,” Pina exclaimed, but with the air of one who wants to
say: You two bitches, you sent me off by myself with someone I don’t even
know.
When the two boys left I walked with them a little way, just to make it clear
that they were my friends and had come because of me.
Nino said moodily, “Lina really got lost, what a shame.”
I nodded yes, said goodbye, stood for a while with my feet in the water to
calm myself.
When we got home, Pinuccia and I were lively, Lila thoughtful. Pinuccia told
Nunzia about the visit of the two boys and appeared unexpectedly pleased with
Bruno, who had taken the trouble to make sure that her child wasn’t born with
a craving for coconut. He’s well brought up, she said, a student but not too
boring: he seems not to care about how he’s dressed but everything he has on,
from his bathing suit to his shirt and his sandals, is expensive. She appeared
curious about the fact that someone could be wealthy in a fashion different
from that of her brother, Rino, the Solaras. She made a remark that struck me:
At the bar on the beach he bought me this and that without showing off.
Her mother-in-law, who, for the entire length of that vacation, never went
to the beach but took care of the shopping, the house, preparing dinner and
also the lunch that we carried to the beach the next day, listened as if her
daughter-in-law were recounting to her an enchanted world. Naturally she
noticed immediately that her daughter was preoccupied, and kept glancing at
her questioningly. But Lila was just distracted. She caused no trouble of any
type, she allowed Pinuccia to sleep with her again, she wished everyone good
night. Then she did something completely unexpected. I had just gone to bed
when she appeared in the little room.
“Will you give me one of your books?” she asked.
I looked at her in bewilderment. She wanted to read? How long since she had
opened a book, three, four years? And why now had she decided to start again?
I took the volume of Beckett, the one I used to kill the mosquitoes, and gave it
to her. It seemed the most accessible text I had.
47.
The  week  passed,  between  long  waits  and  encounters  that  ended  too
quickly. The two boys kept to a rigorous schedule. They woke at six in the
morning, they studied until lunchtime, at three they set out for their date with
us, at seven they went home, had dinner, and resumed studying. Nino never
came by himself. He and Bruno, although so different in every way, got along
well, and especially when it came to us they seemed to gain confidence from
each other’s presence.
Pinuccia from the start did not share the hypothesis of their companionship.
She claimed that they were neither particularly friendly nor particularly close.
In her view it was a relationship that was sustained completely by the patience
of Bruno, who was good-natured and so accepted without complaint the fact
that Nino talked his head off from morning till night with all that nonsense
that was constantly coming out of his mouth. “Nonsense, yes,” she repeated,
but then apologized, with a touch of sarcasm, for having described in that way
the talk that I, too, liked so much. “You’re students,” she said, “and it’s logical
that you’re the only ones who understand what you’re saying; but wouldn’t
you agree, at least, that the rest of us get a little fed up?”
Those words pleased me greatly. They ratified in the presence of Lila, a mute
witness, that between Nino and me there was a sort of exclusive relationship,
in which it was hard to interfere. But one day Pinuccia said to Bruno and to
Lila, in a disparaging tone, “Let’s leave those two to act like intellectuals and go
swimming, the water is lovely.” Act like intellectuals was clearly a way of saying
that the things we talked about didn’t interest us seriously, it was an attitude, a
performance. And while I didn’t particularly mind that formulation, it annoyed
Nino a lot, and he broke off in the middle of a sentence. He jumped to his feet,
ran  off  and  dived  into  the  water,  paying  no  attention  to  the  temperature,
splashed us as we started in, shivering and begging him to stop, then went on
to fight with Bruno as if he wanted to drown him.
There, I thought, he’s full of grand thoughts, but if he wants to he can also be
lighthearted  and  fun.  So  why  does  he  only  show  me  his  serious  side?  Has
Professor Galiani convinced him that all I’m interested in is studying? Or is it
me, do I create that impression, with my glasses, the way I speak?
From that moment I noticed with increasing bitterness that the afternoons
slipped away, leaving words burdened with his anxiety to express himself and
mine to anticipate a concept, to hear him say that he agreed with me. He never
took me by the hand, never invited me to sit on the edge of his towel. When I
saw Bruno and Pinuccia laughing at silly things I envied them, I thought: How
much I would like to laugh with Nino like that—I don’t want anything, I don’t
expect anything, I’d just like a little intimacy, even if it’s polite, the way it is
between Pinuccia and Bruno.
Lila  seemed  to  have  other  problems.  For  the  whole  week  she  seemed
tranquil. She spent a great part of the morning in the water, swimming back
and forth, following a line parallel to the shore and a few meters away from it.
Pinuccia and I kept her company, insisting on instructing her even though by
now she swam much better than we did. But soon we got cold and went to lie
on the hot sand, while she continued to exercise with steady arm strokes, feet
kicking lightly, rhythmic mouthfuls of air as Sarratore the father had taught
her. She always has to overdo it, Pinuccia grumbled in the sun, caressing her
belly. And often I got up and shouted, “Enough swimming, you’ve been in the
water too long, you’ll catch cold.” But Lila paid no attention and came out only
when she was livid, her eyes white, her lips blue, her fingertips wrinkled. I
waited for her on the shore with her towel, warmed in the sun; I put it around
her shoulders and rubbed her energetically.
When the two boys, who didn’t skip a single day, arrived, either we took
another  swim  together—though  Lila  generally  refused,  she  stayed  on  her
towel, watching us from the shore—or we all went for a walk and she lagged
behind, picking up shells, or, if Nino and I started talking about the world, she
listened attentively but rarely said anything. In the meantime, small habits
became established, and I was struck by her insistence that they be respected.
For example, Bruno always arrived with cold drinks that he bought on the way,
at a bar on the beach, and one day she pointed out to him that he had brought
me a soda whereas usually I had orangeade; I said, “Thanks, Bruno, this is fine,”
but she made him go and exchange it. For example, Pinuccia and Bruno at a
certain point in the afternoon went to get fresh coconut, and although they
invited us to go with them, it never occurred to Lila to do so, or to me or Nino:
it thus became completely normal for them to go off dry, return wet from a
swim, and bring coconut, with the whitest flesh, and so if it seemed that they
might forget Lila would say, “And where’s the coconut today?”
Also, she was very interested in Nino’s and my conversations. When there
was too much talk about nothing in particular she would say to him, “Didn’t
you read anything interesting today?” Nino smiled, pleased, rambled a bit,
then started on the subjects he cared about. He talked and talked, but there
were  never  real  frictions  between  us:  I  found  myself  almost  always  in
agreement with him, and if Lila interrupted to make an objection she did it
briefly, with tact, without ever accentuating the disagreement.
One  afternoon  he  was  quoting  an  article  that  was  very  critical  of  the
functioning of the public schools, and he went on without a break to speak
disparagingly  of  the  elementary  school  in  our  neighborhood.  I  agreed,  I
recalled how Maestra Oliviero rapped us on the knuckles when we made a
mistake and also the brutal competitions to see who was smartest that she
subjected us to. But Lila, surprising me, said that elementary school for her had
been extremely important, and she praised our teacher in an Italian I hadn’t
heard from her in a long time, so precise, so intense, that Nino didn’t interrupt
her to say what he thought, but listened to her attentively, and in the end
made some generic remarks about the different requirements we have and
about how the same experience can satisfy the needs of one and be insufficient
for the needs of someone else.
There was also another case where Lila revealed a disagreement politely and
in a cultivated Italian. I felt increasingly drawn to arguments based on the
theory  that  the  right  kind  of  interventions,  carried  out  over  time,  would
resolve  problems,  eliminate  injustices,  and  prevent  conflicts.  I  had  quickly
learned  that  system  of  reasoning—I  was  always  very  good  at  that—and  I
applied it every time Nino brought up subjects about which he had read here
and  there:  colonialism,  neocolonialism,  Africa.  But  one  afternoon  Lila  said
softly that there was nothing that could eliminate the conflict between the rich
and the poor.
“Why?”
“Those who are on the bottom always want to be on top, those who are on
top want to stay on top, and one way or another they always reach the point
where they’re kicking and spitting at each other.”
“That’s  exactly  why  problems  should  be  resolved  before  violence  breaks
out.”
“And how? Putting everyone on top, putting everyone on the bottom?”
“Finding a point of equilibrium between the classes.”
“A point where? Those from the bottom meet those from the top in the
middle?”
“Let’s say yes.”
“And those on top will be willing to go down? And those on the bottom will
give up on going any higher?”
“If people work to solve all the problems well, yes. You’re not convinced?”
“No. The classes aren’t playing cards, they’re fighting, and it’s a fight to the
death.”
“That’s what Pasquale thinks,” I said.
“I think so, too, now,” she said calmly.
Apart from those few one-on-one exchanges, there were rarely, between
Nino and Lila, words that were not mediated by me. Lila never addressed him
directly, nor did Nino address her, they seemed embarrassed by one another.
She  appeared  much  more  comfortable  with  Bruno,  who,  though  quiet,
managed, with his kindness, and the pleasant tone in which he would call her
Signora Carracci, to establish a certain familiarity. For example, once when we
all went in the water together—and Nino, surprisingly, did not go on one of the
long swims that made me anxious—she turned to Bruno, and not to him, to
show her after how many strokes she should take her head out of the water to
breathe. He promptly gave her a demonstration. But Nino was annoyed that he
hadn’t been asked, given his mastery of swimming, and he interrupted, making
fun of Bruno’s short arms, his lack of rhythm. Then he showed Lila the right
way. She observed him with attention and immediately imitated him. In the
end Lila’s swimming led Bruno to call her the Esther Williams of Ischia.
When the end of the week arrived—I remember it was a splendid Saturday
morning, the air was still cool and the sharp odor of the pines accompanied us
all the way to the beach—Pinuccia reasserted categorically, “Sarratore’s son is
really unbearable.”
I defended Nino warily. I said in the tone of an expert that when a person
studies,  when  he  becomes  interested  in  things,  he  feels  the  need  to
communicate those interests to others, and for Nino it was like that. Lila didn’t
seem convinced, she made a remark that sounded offensive to me: “If you
removed from Nino’s head the things he’s read, you wouldn’t find anything
there.”
I snapped, “It’s not true. I know him and he has a lot of good qualities.”
Pinuccia, on the other hand, agreed enthusiastically. But Lila, maybe because
she didn’t like that approval, said she hadn’t explained well and reversed the
meaning of the remark, as if she had formulated it only as a trial and now,
hearing it, regretted it, and was grasping at straws to make up for it. He, she
clarified, is habituating himself to the idea that only the big questions are
important, and if he succeeds he will live his whole life only for those, without
being disturbed by anything else: not like us, who think only of our own affairs
—money, house, husband, children.
I didn’t like that version, either. What was she saying? That for Nino feelings
for individual persons would not count, that his fate was to live without love,
without children, without marriage? I forced myself to say:
“You know he has a girlfriend he’s very attached to? They write once a
week.”
Pinuccia interrupted: “Bruno doesn’t have a girlfriend, but he’s looking for
his ideal woman and as soon as he finds her he’ll get married and he wants to
have a lot of children.” Then, without obvious connection, she sighed: “This
week has really flown by.”
“Aren’t you glad? Now your husband will be back,” I replied.
She  seemed  almost  offended  by  the  possibility  that  I  could  imagine  her
feeling any annoyance at Rino’s return.
She exclaimed, “Of course I’m glad.”
Lila then asked me, “And are you glad?”
“That your husbands are returning?”
“No, you know what I meant.”
I did know but I wouldn’t admit it. She meant that the next day, Sunday,
while they were involved with Stefano and Rino, I would be able to see the
boys by myself, and in fact, almost certainly, Bruno, as he had the week before,
would be minding his own business, and I would spend the afternoon with
Nino. And she was right, that was what I was hoping. For days, before going to
sleep, I had been thinking of the weekend. Lila and Pinuccia would have their
conjugal pleasures, I would have the small happinesses of the unmarried girl in
glasses who spends her life studying: a walk, being taken by the hand. Or who
knows, maybe even more. I said, laughing, “What should I understand, Lila?
You’re the lucky ones, who are married.”
48.
The day slid by slowly. While Lila and I sat calmly in the sun waiting until
the time when Nino and Bruno would arrive with cool drinks, Pinuccia’s mood
began, for no reason, to darken. She kept uttering nervous remarks. Now she
was afraid that they wouldn’t come, now she exclaimed that we couldn’t waste
our time waiting for them to show up. When, punctually, the boys appeared
with the drinks, she was surly, and said she felt tired. But a few minutes later,
though still in a bad mood, she changed her mind and agreed, grumbling, to go
get the coconut.
As for Lila, she did something I didn’t like. For the whole week she had never
said anything about the book I had lent her, and so I had forgotten about it. But
as soon as Pinuccia and Bruno left, she didn’t wait for Nino to start talking, and
immediately asked him, “Have you ever been to the theater?”
“A few times.”
“Did you like it?”
“It was all right.”
“I’ve never been, but I’ve seen it on television.”
“It’s not the same thing.”
“I know, but better than nothing.”
And at that point she took out of her bag the book I had given her, the
volume of Beckett’s plays, and showed it to him.
“Have you read this?”
Nino took the book, examined it, admitted uneasily, “No.”
“So there is something you haven’t read.”
“Yes.”
“You should read it.”
Lila  began  to  talk  to  us  about  the  book.  To  my  surprise  she  was  very
deliberate, she talked the way she used to, choosing the words so as to make us
see people and things, and also the emotion she gave them, portraying them
anew, keeping them there, present, alive. She said that we didn’t have to wait
for nuclear war, in the book it was as if it had already happened. She told us at
length  about  a  woman  named  Winnie  who  at  a  certain  point  announced,
another happy day, and she herself declaimed the phrase, becoming so upset
that, in uttering it, her voice trembled slightly: another happy day, words that
were insupportable, because nothing, nothing, she explained, in Winnie’s life,
nothing in her gestures, nothing in her head, was happy, not that day or the
preceding days. But, she added, the biggest impression had been made on her
by a Dan Rooney. Dan Rooney, she said, is blind but he’s not bitter about it,
because he believes that life is better without sight, and in fact he wonders
whether, if one became deaf and mute, life would not be still more life, life
without anything but life.
“Why did you like it?” Nino asked.
“I don’t know yet if I liked it.”
“But it made you curious.”
“It made me think. What does it mean that life is more life without sight,
without hearing, even without words?”
“Maybe it’s just a gimmick.”
“No, what gimmick. There’s a thing here that suggests a thousand others, it’s
not a gimmick.”
Nino didn’t reply. He said only, staring at the cover of the book as if that,
too, needed to be deciphered, “Have you finished it?”
“Yes.”
“Will you lend it to me?”
That request disturbed me, I felt pained. Nino had said, I remembered it
clearly, that he had little interest in literature, what he read was different. I
had given that Beckett to Lila just because I knew that I couldn’t use it in
conversation with him. And now that she was talking about it he was not only
listening but asked to borrow it.
I said, “It’s Professor Galiani’s, she gave it to me.”
“Have you read it?” he asked me.
I had to admit that I hadn’t, but I added right away, “I was thinking of
starting tonight.”
“When you’re finished will you give it to me?”
“If it interests you so much,” I said quickly, “you read it first.”
Nino thanked me, scratched away with his nail the trace of a mosquito from
the cover, said to Lila, “I’ll read it overnight and tomorrow we can talk about
it.”
“Not tomorrow, we won’t see each other.”
“Why?”
“I’ll be with my husband.”
“Oh.”
He seemed annoyed. I waited fearfully for him to ask me if the two of us
would  see  each  other.  But  he  had  a  burst  of  impatience,  he  said,  “I  can’t
tomorrow, either. Bruno’s parents arrive tonight and I have to go sleep in
Barano. I’ll be back on Monday.”
Barano? Monday? I hoped that he would ask me to join him at the Maronti.
But  he  was  distracted,  maybe  his  mind  was  still  on  Dan  Rooney,  who,  not
content with being blind, wished to become deaf and mute, too. He didn’t ask
me anything.
49.
On the way home I said to Lila, “If I lend you a book, which, besides, isn’t
mine, please don’t take it to the beach. I can’t give it back to Professor Galiani
with sand in it.”
“I’m sorry,” she said, and cheerfully gave me a kiss on the cheek. She wanted
to carry both my bag and Pinuccia’s, maybe to ask forgiveness.
Slowly my mood cleared. I thought that Nino hadn’t randomly alluded to the
fact  that  he  was  going  to  Barano:  he  wanted  me  to  know,  and  I  decided
independently to go and see him there. He’s like that, I said to myself, with
growing relief, he needs to be pursued: tomorrow I’ll get up early and go.
Pinuccia’s ill humor, on the other hand, continued. Usually she was quick to
get angry but quick to get over it, too, especially now that pregnancy had
softened not only her body but also the rough edges of her character. Instead
she became increasingly fretful.
“Did Bruno say something unpleasant?” I asked her.
“No.”
“Then what happened?”
“Nothing.”
“Do you not feel well?”
“I’m fine, I don’t even know what’s wrong with me.”
“Go and get ready, Rino will be here.”
“Yes.”
But  she  continued  to  sit  in  her  damp  bathing  suit,  leafing  distractedly
through a photonovel. Lila and I got dressed up, Lila especially decked herself
out as if she were going to a party, and still Pinuccia did nothing. Then even
Nunzia, who was laboring silently over the dinner preparations, said softly,
“Pinù, what’s the matter, sweetie, aren’t you going to get dressed?” No answer.
Only when we heard the roar of the Lambrettas and the voices of the two
young men calling did Pina jump up and run to her room, crying, “Don’t let
them come in, please.”
The evening was bewildering, for the husbands, too. Stefano, by now used to
permanent conflict with Lila, found himself unexpectedly in the company of a
girl who was very affectionate, yielding to caresses and kisses without her
usual irritation; while Rino, accustomed to Pinuccia’s clingy coquettishness,
intensified by her pregnancy, was disappointed that his wife didn’t come down
the stairs to greet him, that he had to look for her in the bedroom, and when
finally he embraced her, he immediately noticed the effort she made to act as if
she were pleased. Not only that. While Lila laughed heartily when, after a few
glasses of wine, the two men started in with the lively sexual allusions that
indicated desire, Pinuccia, at a whispered remark from Rino, laughing, jerked
away and hissed, in a half Italian, “Stop it, you’re a boor.” He got angry: “You
call  me  a  boor?  Boor?”  She  resisted  for  a  few  minutes,  then  her  lower  lip
trembled and she took refuge in her room.
“It’s the pregnancy,” Nunzia said, “you have to be patient.”
Silence. Rino finished eating, then, fuming, went to his wife. He didn’t come
back.
Lila and Stefano decided to go out on the Lambretta to see the beach at
night.  They  left  laughing  together,  kissing.  I  cleared  the  table,  as  usual
struggling with Nunzia, who didn’t want me to lift a finger. We talked about
when she had met Fernando and they fell in love, and she said something that
made a deep impression. She said, “For your whole life you love people and you
never really know who they are.” Fernando was both good and bad, and she
had loved him very much but she had also hated him. “So,” she emphasized,
“there’s nothing to worry about: Pinuccia is in a bad mood but she’ll get over it;
and you remember how Lina came back from her honeymoon? Well, look at
them now. Life is like that: one day you’re getting hit, the next kissed.”
I went to my room, I tried to finish Chabod, but I recalled how Nino had been
charmed by the way Lila talked about that Rooney, and the desire to waste
time with the idea of nationhood vanished. Even Nino is evasive, I thought,
even with Nino it’s hard to understand who he is. He seemed not to care about
literature and yet Lila randomly picks up a book of plays, says two foolish
things,  and  he  becomes  ardent  about  it.  I  rummaged  among  the  books  in
search  of  other  literary  things,  but  I  had  none.  I  realized  that  a  book  was
missing. Was that possible? Professor Galiani had given me six. Nino now had
one, one I was reading, on the marble windowsill there were three. Where was
the sixth?
I  looked  everywhere,  even  under  the  bed,  and  while  I  was  looking  I
remembered that it was a book about Hiroshima. I was upset—surely Lila must
have taken it while I was in the bathroom. What was happening to her? After
years of shoes, engagement, love, grocery store, dealings with the Solaras, had
she  decided  to  revert  to  the  person  she  had  been  in  elementary  school?
Certainly there had already been a sign: she had wanted to make that bet,
which, whatever its outcome, had surely been a way of demonstrating to me
her wish to study. But had she followed up on that desire, had she actually
done it? No. Yet had Nino’s conversation been enough—six afternoons of sun
on the sand—to revive in her the desire to learn, maybe compete again to be
the best? Was that why she had sung the praises of Maestra Oliviero? Why had
she found it wonderful that someone should become passionate for his whole
life only about important things and not those of daily life? I left my room on
tiptoe, opening the door carefully, so that it wouldn’t squeak.
The house was silent, Nunzia had gone to sleep, Stefano and Lila weren’t
back yet. I went into their room: a chaos of clothes, shoes, suitcases. On a chair
I  found  the  volume,  it  was  titled  Hiroshima  the  Day  After.  She  had  taken  it
without asking my permission, as if my things were hers, as if what I was I
owed to her, as if even Professor Galiani’s attention to my education resulted
from the fact that she, with a distracted gesture, with a tentative phrase, had
put me in the position of gaining that privilege for myself. I thought of taking
the book. But I was ashamed, I changed my mind, and left it there.
50.
It was a dull Sunday. I suffered from the heat all night, I didn’t dare open the
window for fear of the mosquitoes. I fell asleep, woke up, fell asleep again. Go
to Barano? With what result? Spend the day playing with Ciro, Pino, and Clelia,
while Nino took long swims or sat in the sun without saying a word, in mute
conflict with his father. I woke up late, at ten, and as soon as I opened my eyes
a sensation of loss, as if from a great distance, came over me and pained me.
I learned from Nunzia that Pinuccia and Rino had already gone to the beach,
while Stefano and Lila were still sleeping. I soaked my bread in the caffelatte
without wanting it, I conclusively gave up going to Barano. I went to the beach,
anxious and sad.
I found Rino sleeping in the sun, his hair wet, his heavy body lying, stomach
down, on the sand, and Pinuccia walking back and forth on the shore. I invited
her to go toward the fumaroles, she refused rudely. I walked for a long time
alone in the direction of Forio to calm myself.
The morning passed slowly. When I came back I went swimming, then lay in
the sun. I had to listen to Rino and Pinuccia, who, as if I weren’t there, were
murmuring to each other phrases such as: “Don’t go.”
“I have to work: the shoes have to be ready for the fall. Did you see them, do
you like them?”
“Yes, but the things Lina made you add are ugly, take them off.”
“No, they look good.”
“You see? What I say counts for nothing with you.”
“That’s not true.”
“It’s very true, you don’t love me anymore.”
“I do love you, and you know how much I want you.”
“No way, look at the belly I have.”
“I’d give that belly ten thousand kisses. For the whole week all I do is think
about you.”
“Then don’t go to work.”
“I can’t.”
“Then I’ll leave tonight, too.”
“We’ve already paid our share, you have to have your vacation.”
“I don’t want it anymore.”
“Why?”
“Because as soon as I fall asleep I have terrible dreams and I’m awake all
night.”
“Even when you sleep with my sister?”
“Even more, if your sister could kill me, she would.”
“Go sleep with my mamma.”
“Your mamma snores.”
Pinuccia’s tone of voice was unbearable. All day I tried to figure out the
reasons for her complaints. That she didn’t sleep much or very well was true.
But that she wanted Rino to stay, or that she really wanted to leave with him,
seemed to me a lie. At one point I was convinced that she was trying to tell him
something that she herself didn’t know and so could express only in the form
of peevishness. But then I forgot about it, I had other things to think about.
Lila’s exuberance, first of all.
When she appeared at the beach with her husband, she seemed happier than
the night before. She wanted to show him how she had learned to swim, and
together they headed away from the shore—out where it’s deep, Stefano said,
even though it was really only a few meters from the shore. With her elegant
and precise strokes, and the rhythmic turn of the head to breathe that she had
by now learned, moving her mouth away from the water, she immediately left
him behind. Then she stopped to wait for him, laughing, until he caught up,
clumsily flailing his arms, his head straight up, as he snorted at the water that
sprayed in his face.
She was even livelier in the afternoon, when they went for a ride on the
Lambretta. Rino wanted to drive around, too, and since Pinuccia refused—she
was afraid of falling and losing the baby—he said to me, “You come, Lenù.” It
was my first such experience, with Stefano in the lead, Rino following, and the
wind, and the fear of falling or crashing, and the increasing excitement, the
strong odor that came from the sweaty back of Pinuccia’s husband, and the
swaggering  self-confidence  that  pushed  him  to  violate  every  rule  and  to
respond to any protests according to the habits of the neighborhood, braking
suddenly, threatening, always ready to fight to assert his right to do as he
pleased. It was fun, a return to those feelings of a bad girl, very different from
the ones Nino inspired in me when he appeared on the beach, in the afternoon,
with his friend.
In the course of that Sunday I named the two boys often: I especially liked
saying the name of Nino. I quickly noticed that both Pinuccia and Lila acted as
if it hadn’t been the three of us who spent time with Bruno and Nino, but only
me. As a result, when their husbands said goodbye, hurrying off to catch the
ferry, Stefano asked me to say hello to Soccavo’s son for him, as if I were the
only one who would have the opportunity to see him, and Rino teased me, with
remarks like: Who do you like more, the son of the poet or the son of the
mortadella maker? Who do you think is handsomer? as if his wife and sister
had no basis for forming their own opinions.
Finally, the reactions of both to the departure of their husbands annoyed
me. Pinuccia became cheerful, she wanted to wash her hair, which—she said
aloud—was full of sand. Lila lounged about the house listlessly, then she lay
down on her unmade bed, paying no attention to the mess in the room. When I
went to say good night I saw that she hadn’t even undressed: she was reading
the book about Hiroshima, frowning, eyes narrowed. I didn’t reproach her, I
said only, perhaps a little sharply: “How is it that you suddenly feel like reading
again?”
“It’s none of your business,” she answered.
51.
On Monday Nino appeared, like a ghost evoked by my desire, not at four in
the afternoon, as usual, but, surprisingly, at ten in the morning. We three girls
had just arrived at the beach, resentful, each convinced that the others had
spent too much time in the bathroom, Pinuccia particularly upset about how
her hair had been ruined by her sleeping on it. It was she who spoke first,
stern, almost aggressive. She asked Nino, even before he could explain to us,
why in the world he had turned his schedule upside down:
“Why didn’t Bruno come, he had better things to do?”
“His parents are still here, they’re leaving at noon.”
“Then he’ll come?”
“I think so.”
“Because if he’s not coming I’m going back to sleep, with just the three of
you I’ll be bored.”
And while Nino was telling us how terrible his Sunday in Barano had been,
and so he had left early and, since he couldn’t go to Bruno’s, had come straight
to the beach, she interrupted once or twice, asking in a whine: Who’s going to
go swimming with me? Since both Lila and I ignored her, she went into the
water angrily by herself.
Never mind. We preferred to listen attentively to the list of wrongs that
Nino suffered at the hands of his father. A cheater, he called him, a malingerer.
He had settled himself in Barano, extending his leave from work on the ground
of  some  feigned  illness,  which  had  been  properly  certified,  however,  by  a
health-service doctor who was a friend of his. “My father,” he said in disgust,
“is in everything and for everything the negation of the general interest.” And
then,  without  a  break,  he  did  something  unpredictable.  With  a  sudden
movement that made me jump he leaned over and gave me a big, noisy kiss on
the cheek, followed by the remark: “I’m really glad to see you.” Then, slightly
embarrassed, as if he had realized that with that effusiveness toward me he
might be acting rudely toward Lila, he said: “May I also give you a kiss?”
“Of course,” Lila answered, affably, and he gave her a light kiss, with no
sound, a barely perceptible contact. After that he began to talk excitedly about
the plays of Beckett: Ah, how he liked those guys buried in the ground up to
their  necks;  and  how  beautiful  the  statement  was  about  the  fire  that  the
present kindles inside you; and, even though among the thousand evocative
things that Maddy and Dan Rooney said he had had a hard time picking out the
precise point cited by Lila, well, the concept that life is felt more when you are
blind, deaf, mute, and maybe without taste or touch was objectively interesting
in itself. In his view it meant: Let’s get rid of all the filters that prevent us from
fully savoring our being here and now, real.
Lila appeared bewildered, she said that she had thought about it and that life
in the pure state frightened her. She expressed herself with some emphasis,
she exclaimed, “Life without seeing and without speaking, without speaking
and listening, life without a covering, without a container, is shapeless.” She
didn’t use exactly those words, but certainly she said “shapeless” and she said
it with a gesture of revulsion. Nino repeated reluctantly, “shapeless,” as if it
were a curse word. Then he started talking again, even more overwrought,
until, with no warning, he took off his shirt, revealing himself in all his dark
thinness, grabbed us both by the hand, and dragged us into the water, as I cried
happily, “No, no, no, I’m cold, no,” and he answered, “Here finally another happy
day,” and Lila laughed.
So, I thought contentedly, Lila is wrong. So there certainly exists another
Nino:  not  the  gloomy  boy,  not  the  one  who  gets  excited  only  when  he’s
thinking about the general state of the world, but this boy, this boy who plays,
who drags us furiously into the water, who mocks us, grips us, pulls us toward
him, swims away, lets us reach him, lets us grab him, lets us push him under
the water and pretends to be overpowered, pretends that we’re drowning him.
When Bruno arrived things got even better. We all took a walk together and
Pinuccia’s good humor slowly returned. She wanted to swim again, she wanted
to eat coconut. Starting then, and for the whole week that followed, we found
it completely natural that the boys should join us on the beach at ten in the
morning and remain until sunset, when we said, “We have to go or Nunzia will
get mad,” and they resigned themselves to going off to do some studying.
How intimate we were now. If Bruno called Lila Signora Carracci to tease
her, she punched him playfully on the shoulder, chased him, threatening. If he
showed too much reverence toward Pinuccia because she was carrying a child,
Pinuccia linked arms with him, said, “Come on, let’s run, I want a soda.” As for
Nino, now he often took my hand, put an arm around my shoulders, and then
put an arm around Lila’s, too, he took her index finger, her thumb. The wary
distances receded. We became a group of five friends who were having a good
time doing little or nothing. We played games, whoever lost paid a fine. The
fines were almost always kisses, but joke kisses, obviously: Bruno had to kiss
Lila’s sandy feet, Nino my hand, and then cheeks, forehead, ear, with a pop in
the auricle. We also had long games of tamburello. The ball flew through the air
and was sent back with a sharp crack against the taut hide of the tambourines;
Lila was good, Nino, too. But most agile of all, most precise, was Bruno. He and
Pinuccia always won, against Lila and me, against Lila and Nino, against Nino
and me. They won partly because we had all developed a sort of automatic
tenderness  toward  Pina.  She  ran,  she  jumped,  she  tumbled  on  the  sand,
forgetting her condition, and so we ended by letting her win, sometimes just to
soothe  her.  Bruno  reproached  her  gently,  made  her  sit  down,  said,  that’s
enough and cried, “Point for Pinuccia, excellent.”
A thread of happiness thus began to extend through the hours and days. I no
longer minded that Lila took my books, in fact it seemed to me a good thing. I
didn’t mind that, when the discussions got going, she more and more often
said what she thought and Nino listened attentively and seemed to lack the
words for a response. I found it thrilling, in fact, that in those circumstances he
would suddenly stop talking to her and start up with me, as if that helped him
rediscover his convictions.
That was what happened the time Lila showed off her reading on Hiroshima.
A tense discussion arose, because Nino, I saw, was so critical of the United
States and didn’t like the fact that the Americans had a military base in Naples,
but he was also attracted by their way of life, he said he wanted to study it, and
he was disappointed when Lila said, more or less, that dropping atomic bombs
on Japan had been a war crime, in fact more than a war crime—the war had
scarcely anything to do with it—it had been a crime of pride.
“Can I remind you of Pearl Harbor?” he said hesitantly.
I didn’t know what Pearl Harbor was but I discovered that Lila did. She told
him  that  Pearl  Harbor  and  Hiroshima  were  two  things  that  couldn’t  be
compared, that Pearl Harbor was a vile act of war and Hiroshima was an idiotic,
fierce, vindictive horror, worse, much worse, than the Nazi massacres. And she
concluded: the Americans should be tried like the worst criminals, those who
do terrible things to terrorize the living and keep them on their knees. She was
so passionate that Nino, instead of moving to the counterattack, was silent,
very thoughtful. Then he turned to me, as if she weren’t there. He said that the
problem wasn’t ferocity or revenge but the urgency to bring an end to the
most  atrocious  of  wars  and,  at  the  same  time,  by  using  that  terrible  new
weapon, to all wars. He spoke in a low tone, looking me straight in the eyes, as
if he were interested only in my agreement. It was a wonderful moment. He
himself was wonderful, when he was like that. I was so filled with emotion that
tears rose to my eyes and I had trouble repressing them.
Then Friday came again, a very hot day that we spent mostly in the water.
And suddenly something went bad again.
We had just left the two boys and were going back to the house, the sun was
low, the sky pinkish-blue, when Pinuccia, unexpectedly silent after many long
hours of extravagant playfulness, threw her bag on the ground, sat down on
the side of road, and began to cry with rage, small thin cries, almost a moaning.
Lila narrowed her eyes, stared at her as if she saw not her sister-in-law but
something ugly for which she wasn’t prepared. I went back, frightened, asked,
“Pina, what’s the matter, don’t you feel well?”
“I can’t bear this wet bathing suit.”
“We all have wet bathing suits.”
“It bothers me.”
“Calm down, come on, aren’t you hungry?”
“Don’t tell me to calm down. You irritate me when you tell me to calm down.
I can’t stand you anymore, Lenù, you and your calm down.”
And she started moaning again, and hitting her thighs.
I sensed that Lila was going on without waiting for us. I sensed that she had
decided to do so not out of annoyance or indifference but because there was
something in that behavior, something scorching, and if she got too close it
would burn her. I helped Pinuccia get up, I carried her bag.
52.
Eventually she became quieter, but she spent the evening sulking, as if we
had somehow offended her. When she was rude even to Nunzia, brusquely
criticizing the way the pasta was cooked, Lila flared up and, breaking into a
fierce dialect, dumped on her all the fantastic insults she was capable of. Pina
decided to sleep with me that night.
She tossed and turned in her sleep. And with two people in the room the
heat  made  it  almost  impossible  to  breathe.  Soaked  with  sweat,  I  resigned
myself to opening the window and was tormented by the mosquitoes. Then I
couldn’t sleep at all, I waited for dawn, I got up.
Now I, too, was in a bad mood, I had three or four disfiguring bites on my
face. I went to the kitchen, Nunzia was washing our dirty clothes. Lila, too, was
already up, she had had her bread-and-milk, and was reading another of my
books, who knows when she had stolen it from me. As soon as she saw me, she
gave me a searching glance and asked, with a genuine concern that I didn’t
expect: “How is Pinuccia?”
“I don’t know.”
“Are you angry?”
“Yes, I didn’t sleep a wink, and look at my face.”
“You can’t see anything.”
“You can’t see anything.”
“Nino and Bruno won’t see anything, either.”
“What does that have to do with it?”
“You still like Nino?”
“I’ve told you no a hundred times.”
“Calm down.”
“I am calm.”
“Let’s think about Pinuccia.”
“You think about her, she’s your sister-in-law, not mine.”
“You’re angry.”
“Yes, I am.”
The  day  was  even  hotter  than  the  one  before.  We  went  to  the  beach
apprehensively, the bad mood traveled from one to the other like an infection.
Halfway  there  Pinuccia  realized  she  had  forgotten  her  towel  and  had
another attack of nerves. Lila kept going, head down, without even turning
around.
“I’ll go get it,” I offered.
“No, I’m going back to the house, I don’t feel like the beach.”
“Do you feel sick?”
“I’m perfectly fine.”
“Then what?”
“Look at the belly I’ve got.”
I looked at her belly, I said to her without thinking: “What about me? Don’t
you see these bites on my face?”
She started yelling, she called me an idiot, and ran away to catch up with
Lila.
Once at the beach she apologized, muttering, You’re so good that sometimes
you make me mad.
“I’m not good.”
“I meant that you’re clever.”
“I’m not clever.”
Lila,  who  was  trying  in  any  case  to  ignore  us,  staring  at  the  sea  in  the
direction of Forio, said coldly, “Stop it, they’re coming.”
Pinuccia  started.  “The  long  and  the  short  of  it,”  she  murmured,  with  a
sudden softness in her voice, and she put on some lipstick even though she
already had enough.
The boys’ mood was just as bad as ours. Nino had a sarcastic tone, he said to
Lila, “Tonight the husbands arrive?”
“Of course.”
“And what nice things will you do?”
“We’ll eat, drink, and sleep.”
“And tomorrow?”
“Tomorrow we’ll eat, drink, and sleep.”
“Do they stay Sunday night, too?”
“No, on Sunday we eat, drink, and sleep only in the afternoon.”
Hiding behind a tone of self-mockery, I forced myself to say, “I’m free: I’m
not eating or drinking or going to sleep.”
Nino looked at me as if he were becoming aware of something he had never
noticed, so that I passed a hand over my right cheek, where I had an especially
big mosquito bite. He said to me seriously, “Good, we’ll meet here tomorrow
morning at seven and then climb the mountain. When we get back, the beach
till late. What do you say?”
I felt in my veins the warmth of elation, I said with relief, “All right, at seven,
I’ll bring food.”
Pinuccia asked, unhappily, “And us?”
“You have husbands,” he said, and pronounced “husbands” as if he were
saying toads, snakes, spiders, so that she got up abruptly and went to the
water’s edge.
“She’s  a  little  oversensitive  at  the  moment,”  I  said  in  apology,  “but  it’s
because of her interesting condition, usually she’s not like that.”
Bruno said in his patient voice, “I’ll take her to get some coconut.”
We watched him as, small but well proportioned, his chest powerful, his
thighs strong, he moved over the sand at a steady pace, as if the sun had
neglected to burn the grains he walked on. When Bruno and Pina set off for the
beach bar, Lila said, “Let’s go swimming.”
53.
The three of us moved together toward the sea, me in the middle, between
them. It’s hard to explain the sudden sense of fullness that had possessed me
when Nino said: We’ll meet here tomorrow morning at seven. Of course I was
sorry  about  the  swings  in  Pinuccia’s  moods,  but  it  was  a  weak  sorrow,  it
couldn’t dent my state of well-being. I was finally content with myself, with the
long, exciting Sunday that awaited me; and at the same time I felt proud to be
there, at that moment, with the people who had always been important in my
life, whose importance couldn’t be compared even to that of my parents, my
siblings. I took them both by the hand, I gave a shout of happiness, I dragged
them into the cold water, spraying icy splinters of foam. We sank as if we were
a single organism.
As soon as we were underwater we let go of the chain of our fingers. I’ve
never liked the cold of the water in my hair, on my head, in my ears. I re-
emerged immediately, spluttering. But I saw that they were already swimming
and I began to swim, in order not to lose them. I had trouble right away: I
wasn’t capable of swimming straight, head in the water, with steady strokes;
my right arm was stronger than the left, and I veered right; I had to be careful
not to swallow the salt water. I tried to keep up by not losing sight of them, in
spite of my myopic vision. They’ll stop, I thought. My heart was pounding, I
slowed down, I finally stopped and floated, admiring their confident progress
toward the horizon, side by side.
Maybe  they  were  going  too  far.  I,  too,  in  the  grip  of  enthusiasm,  had
ventured beyond the reassuring imaginary line that normally allowed me to
return to the shore in a few strokes, and beyond which Lila herself had never
gone. Now there she was, competing with Nino. Despite her inexperience she
wouldn’t give in, she wanted to stay even, she pushed on, farther and farther.
I began to worry. If her strength failed. If she felt ill. Nino is expert, he’ll help
her. But if he gets a cramp, if he collapses, too. I looked around, the current
was dragging me to the left. I can’t wait for them here, I have to go back. I
glanced  down,  and  it  was  a  mistake.  The  azure  immediately  turned  bluer,
darkened like night, even though the sun was shining, the surface of the sea
sparkled, and pure white shreds of cloud were stretching across the sky. I
perceived the abyss, I sensed its liquidness, with nothing to hold on to, I felt it
as a pit of the dead from which anything might rise up in a flash, touch me,
grab me, sink its teeth into me, drag me to the bottom.
I tried to calm myself: I shouted Lila. My eyes without glasses were of no use,
defeated by the sparkle of the water. I thought of my outing with Nino the
following day. Slowly I turned around, on my back, paddling with legs and
arms until I reached the shore.
I sat there, half in the water, half on the beach, I could just make out their
heads, black dots like abandoned buoys on the surface of the sea, I felt relieved.
Lila not only was safe but she had done it, she had stayed with Nino. How
stubborn she is, how she overdoes it, how courageous she is. I got up, joined
Bruno, who was sitting beside our things.
“Where’s Pinuccia?” I asked.
He gave a timid smile that seemed to conceal a worry.
“She left.”
“Where did she go?”
“Home, she says she has to pack her bags.”
“Her bags?”
“She wants to go, she doesn’t feel she can leave her husband alone for so
long.”
I  took  my  things  and,  after  insisting  that  he  not  lose  sight  of  Nino  and
especially  Lila,  I  left,  still  dripping  wet,  to  try  to  find  out  what  else  was
happening to Pina.
54.
It was a disastrous afternoon followed by an even more disastrous evening. I
found that Pinuccia was really packing her bags and that Nunzia was unable to
quiet her.
“You mustn’t worry,” she said to her soothingly, “Rino knows how to wash
his underwear, he knows how to cook, and then there is his father, his friends.
He doesn’t think you’re here to have fun, he understands that you’re here to
rest  so  that  you’ll  have  a  fine  healthy  baby.  Come,  I’ll  help  you  tidy  up
everything. I never went on vacation, but today there’s money, thank God, and
although you mustn’t waste it, a little comfort isn’t a sin, you can afford it. So
Pinù, please, child: Rino worked all week, he’s tired, he’s about to arrive. Don’t
let him find you like this, you know him, he’ll worry, and when he worries he
gets angry, and if he gets angry what’s the result? The result is that you want
to leave to stay with him, he has left to be with you, and now when you’ll be
together, and you ought to be happy, instead you’re torturing each other. Does
that seem nice to you?”
But Pinuccia was impervious to the arguments that Nunzia rattled off. Then
I began to enumerate them, too, since we had reached the point where we
were taking her many things out of the suitcases and she was putting them in,
she cried, she calmed down, she started again.
Eventually Lila returned. She leaned against the doorpost and stood looking,
with a frown, a long horizontal crease across her brow, at that disheveled
image of Pinuccia.
“Everything all right?” I asked her.
She nodded yes.
“You’re such a good swimmer now.”
She said nothing.
She had the expression of someone who is forced to repress joy and fear at
the same time. It was evident that the spectacle of Pinuccia was becoming
increasingly  intolerable  to  her.  Her  sister-in-law  was  again  displaying  her
intention to depart, farewells, regret that she had forgotten this object or that,
sighs for her Rinuccio, all interwoven, in a contradictory fashion, with regret
for the sea, the smells of the gardens, the beach. And yet Lila said nothing, not
one of her mean statements or even a sarcastic remark. Finally, the words
came  out  of  her  mouth,  not  a  call  to  order  but  the  announcement  of  an
imminent event that threatened us all: “They’re about to arrive.”
At that point Pinuccia collapsed disconsolate on the bed, next to the closed
suitcases. Lila grimaced, went off to dress. She returned soon afterward in a
clinging red dress, her black hair pulled back. She was the first to recognize the
sound of the Lambrettas, she looked out the window, waved enthusiastically.
Then, becoming serious, she turned to Pinuccia and in her most scornful voice
hissed: “Go wash your face and take off that bathing suit.”
Pinuccia looked at her without reacting. Something passed rapidly between
the two girls, their secret feelings darted invisibly, infinitesimal particles shot
at each other from the depths of themselves, a jolt and a trembling that lasted
a long second; I caught it, bewildered, but couldn’t understand, while they did,
they understood, in something they recognized each other, and Pinuccia knew
that Lila knew, understood and wished to help her, even with contempt. So she
obeyed.
55.
Stefano and Rino burst in. Lila was even more affectionate than the week
before. She embraced Stefano, let him embrace her, gave a cry of joy when he
took a case out of his pocket and she opened it and found a gold necklace with
a pendant in the shape of a heart.
Naturally Rino, too, had brought a present for Pinuccia, who did her best to
react as her sister-in-law had, but her painful fragility was visible in her eyes.
So Rino’s kisses and embraces and the gift had soon swept away the form of the
happy  wife  within  which  she  had  so  hastily  enclosed  herself.  Her  mouth
started to tremble, the fountain of tears erupted, and she said, in a choked
voice, “I’ve packed my bags. I don’t want to stay here a minute longer, I want
to be with you and only you, always.”
Rino smiled, he was moved by all that love, he laughed. Then he said, “I also
want to be with you and only you, always.” Finally he understood that his wife
was not just communicating how much she missed him, and how much she
would always miss him, but that she really wanted to leave, that everything
was ready for departure, and she was insisting on that decision with a real,
unbearable grief.
They shut themselves in the bedroom to discuss it, but the discussion didn’t
last long, Rino came out, shouting at his mother, “Mamma, I want to know
what happened.” And without waiting for an answer, he turned aggressively to
his sister: “If it’s your fault by God I’ll smash your face.” Then he shouted at his
wife, “That’s enough, you’re a pain in the ass, come out now, I’m tired, I want
to eat.”
Pinuccia reappeared with swollen eyes. When Stefano saw her, he made a
playful attempt to defuse the situation, embracing his sister, and sighing, “Ah,
love,  you  women  drive  us  crazy  for  it.”  Then,  as  if  suddenly  recalling  the
primary cause of his own craziness, he kissed Lila on the lips, and in observing
the unhappiness of the other couple he felt happy at how unexpectedly happy
they were.
We all sat down at the table and Nunzia served us, one by one, in silence. But
this time it was Rino who couldn’t bear it, he yelled that he wasn’t hungry
anymore, he hurled the plate of spaghetti and clams into the middle of the
kitchen. I was frightened, Pinuccia began to cry again. And even Stefano lost
his  composure  and  said  to  his  wife,  sharply:  “Let’s  go,  I’ll  take  you  to  a
restaurant.” Amid the protests of Nunzia and even of Pinuccia they left the
kitchen. In the silence that followed we heard the Lambretta setting off.
I helped Nunzia clean the floor. Rino got up, went to the bedroom. Pinuccia
locked herself in the bathroom, but then she came out and joined her husband.
She  closed  the  door.  Only  then  did  Nunzia  explode,  forgetting  her  role  of
tolerant mother-in-law.
“Do you see how that bitch is making Rinuccio suffer? What’s happened to
her?”
I said I didn’t know, and it was true, but I spent the evening consoling her by
romanticizing Pinuccia’s feelings. I said that if I were carrying a child in my
belly I, like her, would have wanted to be with my husband always, to feel
protected, to be sure that my responsibility as a mother was shared by his as a
father. I said that if Lila was there to have a child, and it was clear that the cure
was  right,  that  the  sea  was  doing  her  good—you  had  only  to  look  at  the
happiness that lighted up her face when Stefano arrived—Pinuccia instead was
already full of love and wished to give all that love to Rino every minute of the
day and night, otherwise it weighed on her and she suffered.
It was a sweet hour, Nunzia and I in the kitchen that was tidy now, the
dishes and the pots shining because of the care with which they had been
washed. She said to me, “How well you speak, Lenù, it’s clear that you’ll have a
wonderful future.” Tears came to her eyes, she murmured that Lila should
have gone to school, it was her destiny. “But my husband didn’t want it,” she
added, “and I didn’t know how to oppose him: there wasn’t the money then,
and yet she could have done as you did; instead she got married, she chose a
different path and one can’t go back, life takes us where it wants.” She wished
me happiness, “with a fine young man who has studied like you.” She asked if I
really liked the son of Sarratore. I denied it, but I confided to her that I was
going the next day to climb the mountain with him. She was glad, she helped
me  make  some  sandwiches  with  salami  and  provolone.  I  wrapped  them  in
paper, put them in the bag with my towel for swimming, and everything else I
needed. She urged me to be prudent as always and we said good night.
I went to my room, read a little, but I was distracted. How lovely it would be
to go out early in the morning, with the cool air, the scents. How much I loved
the sea, and even Pinuccia, her tears, the evening’s quarrel, the conciliatory
love that, week by week, was increasing between Lila and Stefano. And how
much I desired Nino. And how pleasant it was to have there with me, every
day, him and my friend, the three of us content despite misunderstandings,
despite the bad feelings that did not always remain silent in the dark depths.
I heard Stefano and Lila return. Their voices and laughter were muffled.
Doors opened, closed, opened again. I heard the tap, the flush. Then I turned
off the light, I listened to the faint rustle of the reeds, the scurrying in the
henhouse, I fell asleep.
But I woke immediately, there was someone in my room.
“It’s me,” Lila whispered.
I felt her sitting on the edge of the bed, I was about to turn on the light.
“No,” she said, “I’ll stay only a moment.”
I turned it on anyway, I sat up.
She was wearing a pale pink nightgown. Her skin was so darkened by the
sun that her eyes seemed white.
“Did you see how far I went?”
“You were great, but I was worried.”
She shook her head proudly and gave a little smile as if to say that the sea
now belonged to her. Then she became serious.
“I have to tell you something.”
“What?”
“Nino kissed me,” she said, and she said it in one breath, like someone who,
making  a  spontaneous  confession,  is  trying  to  hide,  even  from  herself,
something more unconfessable. “He kissed me but I kept my lips closed.”
56.
The account was detailed. She, exhausted by the long swim and yet satisfied
that she had proved how proficient she was, had leaned against him so that it
would be less effort to float. But Nino had taken advantage of her closeness and
had pressed his lips hard against hers. She had immediately compressed her
mouth and although he had tried to open it with the tip of his tongue he hadn’t
been able to. “You’re crazy,” she had said, pushing him away, “I’m married.”
But Nino had answered, “I’ve loved you long before your husband, ever since
we had that competition in class.” Lila had ordered him never to try it again
and they had started swimming again toward the shore. “He pressed so hard
he hurt my lips,” she concluded, “and they still hurt.”
She waited for me to react, but I managed not to ask questions or comment.
When she told me not to go to the mountain with him unless Bruno came, too,
I said coldly that if Nino had kissed me, I wouldn’t have found anything bad
about it, I wasn’t married and didn’t even have a boyfriend. “Only it’s a pity,” I
added, “that I don’t like him: kissing him would be like putting my mouth on a
dead rat.” Then I pretended to be unable to repress a yawn and she, after a look
that seemed to be of affection and also of admiration, went to bed. I wept from
the moment she left until dawn.
Today I feel some uneasiness in recalling how much I suffered, I have no
sympathy for myself of that time. But in the course of that night it seemed to
me that I had no reason to live. Why did Nino behave in that way? He kissed
Nadia, he kissed me, he kissed Lila. How could he be the same person I loved,
who was so serious, so thoughtful. The hours passed, but it was impossible for
me to accept that he was as profound in confronting the great problems of the
world as he was superficial in feelings of love. I began to question myself, I had
made a mistake, I was deluded. Was it possible that I—short, too full-figured,
wearing glasses, I diligent but not intelligent, I who pretended to be cultured,
informed, when I wasn’t—could have believed that he would like me even just
for the length of a vacation? And, besides, had I ever really thought that? I
examined my behavior scrupulously. No, I wasn’t able to tell myself what my
desires were with any clarity. Not only was I careful to hide them from others
but I admitted them to myself in a skeptical way, without conviction. Why had
I never told Lila plainly what I felt for Nino? And now, why had I not cried to
her the pain she had caused me with that confidence in the middle of the
night, why hadn’t I revealed to her that, before kissing her, Nino had kissed
me? What drove me to act like that? Did I keep my feelings muted because I
was frightened by the violence with which, in fact, in my innermost self, I
wanted things, people, praise, triumphs? Was I afraid that that violence, if I did
not get what I wanted, would explode in my chest, taking the path of the worst
feelings—for example, the one that had driven me to compare Nino’s beautiful
mouth to the flesh of a dead rat? Why, then, even when I advanced, was I so
quick to retreat? Why did I always have ready a gracious smile, a happy laugh,
when  things  went  badly?  Why,  sooner  or  later,  did  I  always  find  plausible
excuses for those who made me suffer?
Questions and tears. It was daybreak when I felt that I understood what had
happened. Nino had sincerely believed that he loved Nadia. Of course, aware of
my  reputation  with  Professor  Galiani,  he  had  looked  at  me  for  years  with
sincere  respect  and  liking.  But  now,  at  Ischia,  he  had  met  Lila  and  had
understood that she had been since childhood—and would be in the future—his
only true love. Ah yes, surely it had happened that way. And how could one
reproach  him?  Where  was  the  fault?  In  their  history  there  was  something
intense,  sublime:  elective  affinities.  I  called  on  poems  and  novels  as
tranquilizers. Maybe, I thought, studying has been useful to me just for this: to
calm myself. She had kindled the flame in his breast, he had preserved it for
years without realizing it: now that that flame had flared up, what could he do
but love her. Even if she was married and therefore inaccessible, forbidden:
marriage  lasts  forever,  beyond  death.  Unless  one  violates  it,  condemning
oneself to the infernal whirlwind until Judgment Day. It seemed to me, when
dawn  broke,  that  I  had  gained  some  clarity.  Nino’s  love  for  Lila  was  an
impossible  love.  Like  mine  for  him.  And  only  within  that  frame  of
unattainability did the kiss he had given her in the middle of the sea begin to
seem utterable.
The kiss.
It hadn’t been a choice, it had happened: especially since Lila knew how to
make things happen. Whereas I don’t, what will I do now. I’ll go to our meeting.
We’ll climb Epomeo. Or no. I’ll leave tonight with Stefano and Rino. I’ll say that
my mother wrote and needs me. How can I go climbing with him when I know
that  he  loves  Lila,  that  he  kissed  her.  And  how  will  I  be  able  to  see  them
together every day, swimming, going farther and farther out. I was exhausted,
I fell asleep. I woke with a start, and found that the formulas running through
my head really had tamed the suffering a little. I hurried to the meeting.
57.
I was sure that he wouldn’t come, but when I got to the beach he was already
there, and without Bruno. But I realized that he had no desire to look for the
road to the mountain, to set out on unknown paths. He said that he was ready
to  go,  if  I  really  wanted  to,  but  he  predicted  that  in  this  heat  we’d  get
unbearably exhausted and dismissed the idea that we’d ever find anything as
worthwhile as a good swim. I began to worry, I thought he was on the verge of
saying that he was going to go back and study. Instead, to my surprise, he
proposed renting a boat. He counted and recounted the money he had, I took
out  my  few  cents.  He  smiled,  he  said  gently,  “You’ve  taken  care  of  the
sandwiches, I’ll do this.” A few minutes later we were on the sea, he at the oars,
I sitting in the stern.
I felt better. I thought maybe Lila had lied to me, that he hadn’t kissed her.
But in some part of myself I knew very well that it wasn’t so: I sometimes lied,
yes, even (or especially) to myself; she, on the other hand, as far as I could
remember, had never done so. Besides, I had only to wait a while and it was
Nino himself who explained things. When we were out on the water he let go
of the oars and dived in, I did the same. He didn’t swim the way he usually did,
mingling with the undulating surface of the sea. Instead he dropped toward
the bottom, disappeared, reappeared farther on, sank again. I was alarmed by
the depth, and swam around the boat, not daring to go too far, until I got tired
and clumsily pulled myself in. After a while he joined me, grabbed the oars,
began to row energetically, following a line parallel to the coast, toward Punta
Imperatore. So far we had remarked on the sandwiches, the heat, the sea, how
wise we had been not to take the mule paths up Epomeo. To my increasing
wonder he hadn’t yet resorted to the subjects he was reading about in books, in
journals, in newspapers, even though every so often, afraid of the silence, I
threw out some remark that might set off his passion for the things of the
world. But no, he had something else on his mind. And eventually he put down
the oars, stared for a moment at a rock face, a flight of seagulls, then he said:
“Did Lina say anything to you?”
“About what?”
He pressed his lips together uneasily, and said, “All right, I’m going to tell
you what happened. Yesterday I kissed her.”
That was the beginning. We spent the rest of the day talking about the two
of them. We went swimming again, he explored cliffs and caves, we ate the
sandwiches, drank all the water I had brought, he wanted to teach me to row,
but as for talking we couldn’t talk about anything else. And what most struck
me was that he didn’t try even once, as he normally tended to do, to transform
his particular situation into a general situation. Only he and Lila, Lila and he.
He said nothing about love. He said nothing about the reasons one ends up
being in love with one person rather than another. He questioned me, instead,
obsessively about her and her relationship with Stefano.
“Why did she marry him?”
“Because she was in love with him.”
“It can’t be.”
“I assure you it is.”
“She married him for money, to help her family, to settle herself.”
“If that was all she could have married Marcello Solara.”
“Who’s that?”
“A guy who has more money than Stefano and was crazy about her.”
“And she?”
“Didn’t want him.”
“So you think she married the grocer out of love.”
“Yes.”
“And what’s this business about going swimming to have children?”
“The doctor told her.”
“But does she want them?”
“At first no, now I don’t know.”
“And he?”
“He yes.”
“Is he in love with her?”
“Very much.”
“And you, from the outside, do you think that everything’s fine between
them?”
“With Lina things are never fine.”
“Meaning?”
“They had problems from the first day of their marriage, but it was because
of Lina, who couldn’t adjust.”
“And now?”
“Now it’s going better.”
“I don’t believe it.”
He  went  around  and  around  that  point  with  growing  skepticism.  But  I
insisted: Lila never had loved her husband as in that period. And the more
incredulous he appeared the more I piled it on. I told him plainly that between
them  nothing  could  happen,  I  didn’t  want  him  to  delude  himself.  This,
however, was of no use in exhausting the subject. It became increasingly clear
that the more I talked to him in detail about Lila the more pleasant for him
that day between sea and sky would be. It didn’t matter to him that every word
of mine made him suffer. It mattered that I should tell him everything I knew,
the good and the bad, that I should fill our minutes and our hours with her
name. I did, and if at first this pained me, slowly it changed. I felt, that day, that
to speak of Lila with Nino could in the weeks to come give a new character to
the relationship between the three of us. Neither she nor I would ever have
him.  But  both  of  us,  for  the  entire  time  of  the  vacation,  could  gain  his
attention, she as the object of a passion with no future, I as the wise counselor
who kept under control both his folly and hers. I consoled myself with that
hypothesis of centrality. Lila had come to me to tell me about Nino’s kiss. He,
starting out from the confession of that kiss, talked to me for an entire day. I
would become necessary to both.
In fact Nino already couldn’t do without me.
“You think she’ll never be able to love me?” he asked at one point.
“She made a decision, Nino.”
“What?”
“To love her husband, to have a child with him. She’s here just for that.”
“And my love for her?”
“When one is loved one tends to love in return. It’s likely that she’ll feel
gratified. But if you don’t want to suffer more, don’t expect anything else. The
more  Lina  is  surrounded  by  affection  and  admiration,  the  crueler  she  can
become. She’s always been like that.”
We parted at sunset and for a while I had the impression of having had a
good day. But as soon as I was on the road home the anguish returned. How
could I even think of enduring that torture, talking about Lila with Nino, about
Nino with Lila, and, from tomorrow, witnessing their flirtations, their games,
the clasps, the touching? I reached the house determined to announce that my
mother  wanted  me  back  home.  But  as  soon  as  I  came  in  Lila  assailed  me
harshly.
“Where have you been? We came to look for you. We need you, you’ve got to
help us.”
I discovered that they had not had a good day. It was Pinuccia’s fault, she
had tormented everyone. In the end she had cried that if her husband didn’t
want her at home it meant that he didn’t love her and so she preferred to die
with the child. At that point Rino had given in and taken her back to Naples.
58.
I  understood  only  the  next  day  what  Pinuccia’s  departure  meant.  That
evening her absence struck me as positive: no more whining, the house quieted
down, time slithered away silently. When I withdrew into my little room and
Lila followed me, the conversation was apparently without tension. I held my
tongue, careful to say nothing of what I truly felt.
“Do you understand why she wanted to leave?” Lila asked me, speaking of
Pinuccia.
“Because she wants to be with her husband.”
She shook her head no, she said seriously, “She was becoming afraid of her
own emotions.”
“Which means?”
“She fell in love with Bruno.”
I was amazed, I had never thought of that possibility.
“Pinuccia?”
“Yes.”
“And Bruno?”
“He had no idea.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“How do you know?”
“Bruno’s interested in you.”
“Nonsense.”
“Nino told me yesterday.”
“He didn’t say anything to me today.”
“What did you do?”
“We rented a boat.”
“You and he alone?”
“Yes.”
“What did you talk about?”
“Everything.”
“Even about the thing I told you about?”
“What thing?”
“You know.”
“The kiss?”
“Yes.”
“No, he didn’t tell me anything.”
Although I was dazed by the hours of sun and swimming, I managed not to
say the wrong thing. When Lila went to bed I felt that I was floating on the
sheet and that the dark little room was full of blue and reddish lights. Pinuccia
had left in a hurry because she was in love with Bruno? Bruno wanted not her
but  me?  I  thought  back  to  the  relationship  between  Pinuccia  and  Bruno,  I
listened again to remarks, tones of voice, I saw again gestures, and I was sure
that Lila was right. I suddenly felt great sympathy for Stefano’s sister, for the
strength  she  had  shown  in  forcing  herself  to  leave.  But  that  Bruno  was
interested in me I wasn’t convinced. He had never even looked at me. Beyond
the fact that, if he had had the intention that Lila said, he would have come to
the appointment and not Nino. Or at least they would have come together. And
anyway, true or not, I didn’t like him: too short, too curly-haired, no forehead,
wolflike teeth. No and no. Stay in the middle, I thought. That’s what I’ll do.
The next day we arrived at the beach at ten and discovered that the boys
were already there, walking back and forth along the shore. Lila explained
Pinuccia’s absence in a few words: she had to work, she had left with her
husband. Neither Nino nor Bruno showed the least regret and this disturbed
me. How could someone vanish like that, without leaving a void? Pinuccia had
been with us for two weeks. We had all five walked together, we had talked,
joked, gone swimming. In those fifteen days something had certainly happened
that had marked her, she would never forget that first vacation. But we? We,
who in different ways had meant a lot to her, in fact didn’t feel her absence.
Nino, for example, made no comment on that sudden departure. And Bruno
confined himself to saying, gravely, “Too bad, we didn’t even say goodbye.” A
minute later we were already speaking of other things, as if she had never
come to Ischia, to Citara.
Nor did I like a sort of rapid readjustment of roles. Nino, who had always
talked to me and Lila together (in fact very often to me alone), immediately
began talking only to her, as if it were no longer necessary, now that we were
four, to take on the burden of entertaining both of us. Bruno, who until the
preceding Saturday had been occupied with Pinuccia and nothing else, now
focused  on  me,  in  the  same  timid  and  solicitous  way,  as  if  nothing
distinguished us from each other, not even the fact that she was married and
pregnant and I was not.
For the first walk that we took along the shore, we left as four, side by side.
But soon Bruno spotted a shell turned up by a wave, said, “How pretty,” and
bent down to pick it up. Out of politeness I stopped to wait for him, and he
gave  me  the  shell,  which  was  nothing  special.  Meanwhile  Nino  and  Lila
continued to walk, which transformed us into two couples taking a walk on the
water’s  edge,  the  two  of  them  ahead,  the  two  of  us  behind,  they  talking
animatedly, I trying to make conversation with Bruno while Bruno struggled to
talk to me. I tried to hurry, he held me back, against my will. It was difficult to
establish a real connection. His conversation was banal, I don’t know, about the
sea, the sky, the seagulls, but it was evident that he was playing a role, the one
that he thought was right for me. With Pinuccia he must have talked about
other things, otherwise it was hard to know how they had enjoyed spending so
much  time  together.  Besides,  even  if  he  had  touched  on  more  interesting
subjects, it would have been hard to know what he was saying. If he was asking
the time or for a cigarette or a drink of water, he had a direct tone of voice,
clear pronunciation. But when he started with that role of the devoted young
man (the shell, do you like it, look how pretty it is, I’ll give it to you), he got tangled
up, he spoke neither in Italian nor in dialect, but in an awkward language that
came to him in an undertone, mumbled, as if he were ashamed of what he was
saying. I nodded my head yes but I didn’t understand much, and meanwhile I
strained my ears to catch what Nino and Lila were saying.
I imagined that he was talking about the serious subjects he was studying, or
that she was showing off the ideas she got from the books she had taken from
me, and I often tried to catch up to join in their conversations. But every time I
managed to get close enough to pick up some phrase, I was disoriented. He
seemed  to  be  telling  her  about  his  childhood  in  the  neighborhood,  using
intense, even dramatic tones; she listened without interrupting. I felt intrusive,
retreated, resolved to stay behind to be bored by Bruno.
Even when we all decided to go swimming, I wasn’t in time to restore the old
trio. Bruno without warning pushed me into the water, I went under, got my
hair wet when I didn’t want to get my hair wet. When I re-emerged, Nino and
Lila  were  floating  a  few  meters  farther  out  and  were  continuing  to  talk,
seriously. They stayed in the water much longer than we did, but without
going too far from the shore. They must have been so involved in what they
were talking about that they gave up even the luxury of the long swim.
In the late afternoon Nino spoke to me for the first time. He asked roughly,
as if he himself expected a negative answer: “Why don’t we meet after dinner?
We’ll come and get you and take you home.”
They had never asked us to go out in the evening. I gave Lila a questioning
glance, but she looked away. I said, “Lila’s mamma is at home, we can’t leave
her alone all the time.”
Nino didn’t answer nor did his friend intervene to help him out. But after
the last swim, before parting, Lila said, “We’re going to Forio tomorrow night
to telephone my husband. We could get an ice cream together.”
That remark of hers irritated me, but I was even more irritated by what
happened next. As soon as the two boys had set off for Forio, and she was
gathering up her things, she began to reproach me, as if I bore the blame for
the entire day, hour by hour, micro-event upon micro-event, including that
request of Nino’s, and the clear contradiction between my answer and hers, in
some indecipherable yet indisputable way.
“Why were you always with Bruno?”
“I?”
“Yes, you. Don’t ever dare to leave me alone with that guy again.”
“What are you talking about? It was you two who rushed ahead without
stopping to wait for us.”
“We? It was Nino who was rushing.”
“You could have said that you had to wait for me.”
“And you could have said to Bruno: Get going, otherwise we’ll lose them. Do
me a favor: since you like him so much, go out on your own business at night.
Then you’re free to say and do what you like.”
“I’m here for you, not for Bruno.”
“It doesn’t look as though you’re here for me, you’re always doing what you
please.”
“If you don’t want me here anymore I’ll leave tomorrow morning.”
“Yes? And tomorrow night I have to go and get ice cream with those two by
myself?”
“Lila, it was you who said you wanted to get ice cream with them.”
“Of necessity, I have to telephone Stefano, and what an impression we’d
make if we meet them in Forio?”
We  continued  in  this  vein  even  at  the  house,  after  dinner,  in  Nunzia’s
presence. It wasn’t a real quarrel, but an ambiguous exchange with spikes of
malice  in  which  we  both  tried  to  communicate  something  without
understanding each other. Nunzia, who was listening in bewilderment, at a
certain point said, “Tomorrow we’ll have dinner and then I’ll come, too, to get
ice cream.”
“It’s a long way,” I said. But Lila interrupted abruptly: “We don’t have to
walk. We’ll take a mini cab, we’re rich.”
59.
The next day, to adjust to the boys’ new schedule, we arrived at the beach at
nine instead of ten, but they weren’t there. Lila became anxious. We waited,
they didn’t appear at ten or later. Finally, in the early afternoon, they showed
up, with a lighthearted conspiratorial air. They said that since they were going
to spend the evening with us, they had decided to do their studying early. Lila’s
reaction stunned me in particular: she sent them away. Slipping into a violent
dialect, she hissed that they could go and study when they liked, afternoon,
evening, night, no one was holding them back. And since Nino and Bruno made
an effort not to take her seriously and continued to smile as if those words had
been just a witty remark, she put on her sundress, impetuously grabbed her
bag, and  set  off toward  the  road  with long  strides.  Nino ran  after  her  but
returned  soon  afterward  with  a  grim  face.  Nothing  to  do,  she  was  really
enraged and wouldn’t listen to reason.
“It will pass,” I said, pretending to be calm, and I went swimming with them.
I dried in the sun eating a sandwich, I chattered weakly, then I announced that
I, too, had to go home.
“And tonight?” Bruno asked.
“Lina has to call Stefano, we’ll be there.”
But the outburst had upset me greatly. What did that tone, that behavior
mean? What right had she to get angry at an appointment not kept? Why
couldn’t  she  control  herself  and  treat  the  two  young  men  as  if  they  were
Pasquale or Antonio or even the Solaras? Why did she behave like a capricious
girl and not like Signora Carracci?
I got to the house out of breath. Nunzia was washing towels and bathing
suits, Lila was in her room, sitting on the bed and, something that was also
unusual, she was writing. The notebook was resting on her knees, her eyes
narrowed, her brow furrowed, one of my books lying on the sheets. How long it
was since I had seen her write.
“You overdid it,” I said.
She shrugged. She didn’t raise her eyes from the notebook, she continued to
write all afternoon.
At night she decked herself out the way she did when her husband was
arriving, and we drove to Forio. I was surprised that Nunzia, who never went
out in the sun and was very white, had borrowed her daughter’s lipstick to give
a  little  color  to  her  lips  and  her  cheeks.  She  wanted  to  avoid—she  said—
seeming dead already.
We immediately ran into the two boys, who were standing in front of the bar
like sentries beside a sentry box. Bruno was still in shorts, he had only changed
his shirt. Nino was wearing long pants, a shirt of a dazzling white, and his
unruly hair so forcibly tamed that he seemed less handsome to me. When they
noticed  Nunzia’s  presence,  they  stiffened.  We  sat  under  a  canopy,  at  the
entrance to the bar, and ordered spumoni. Nunzia, marveling at it, started
talking  and  wouldn’t  stop.  She  spoke  only  to  the  boys.  She  praised  Nino’s
mother,  recalling  how  pretty  she  was;  she  told  several  stories  of  wartime,
neighborhood events, and asked Nino if he remembered; when he said no, she
replied,  with  absolute  certainty,  “Ask  your  mother,  you’ll  see  that  she
remembers.” Lila soon gave signs of impatience, announced that it was time to
telephone Stefano, and went into the bar, where the phone booths were. Nino
grew silent and Bruno readily replaced him in the conversation with Nunzia. I
noted,  with  annoyance,  that  he  wasn’t  awkward  the  way  he  was  when  he
talked to me alone.
“Excuse me a moment,” Nino said suddenly. He got up, went into the bar.
Nunzia became agitated. She whispered in my ear, “He’s not going to pay is
he? I’m the oldest, so it’s up to me.”
Bruno heard her and said that it was already paid for, he was hardly going to
let a lady pay. Nunzia resigned herself, went on to inquire about his father’s
sausage factory, bragged about her husband and son, who also had a factory—
they had a shoe factory.
Lila didn’t return. I was worried. I left Nunzia and Bruno chatting, and I, too,
went into the bar. When had a telephone call to Stefano ever lasted so long?
The two telephone booths were empty. I looked around me, but, standing still
like that, I just bothered the owner’s sons, who were waiting on the tables. I
glimpsed a door left ajar to let in the air, opening onto a courtyard. I went out
hesitantly, an odor of old tires mingled with the smell of the chicken coop. The
courtyard was empty, but I noticed that on one side of the boundary wall there
was an opening and, beyond it, a garden. I crossed the space, cluttered with
rusty scrap iron, and before I entered the garden I saw Lila and Nino. The
brightness of the summer night licked the plants. They were holding each
other tight, they were kissing. He had one hand under her skirt, she was trying
to push it away, but she went on kissing him.
I retreated quickly, trying not to make any noise. I went back to the bar, I
told Nunzia that Lila was still on the telephone.
“Are they quarreling?”
“No.”
I felt as if I were burning up, but the flames were cold and I felt no pain. She
is married, I said to myself, she’s been married scarcely more than a year.
Lila returned without Nino. She was impeccable, and yet I felt the disorder,
in her clothes, in her body.
We waited a while, he didn’t show up, I realized that I hated them both. Lila
got up, said, “Let’s go, it’s late.” When we were already in the cab that would
take us back to the house, Nino arrived, running, and said goodbye cheerfully.
“See you tomorrow,” he cried, friendly as I had never seen him. I thought: the
fact  that  Lila  is  married  isn’t  an  obstacle  for  him  or  for  her,  and  that
observation seemed to me so odiously true that it turned my stomach, and I
brought a hand to my mouth.
Lila went to bed right away, I waited in vain for her to come and confess
what she had done and what she proposed to do. Today, I believe that she
didn’t know herself.
60.
The days that followed clarified the situation further. Usually Nino arrived
with a newspaper, a book: no more. Animated conversations about the human
condition faded, were reduced to distracted phrases that sought an opening for
more  private  words.  Lila  and  Nino  got  in  the  habit  of  swimming  far  out
together, until they were indistinguishable from the shore. Or they compelled
us  to  long  walks  that  consolidated  the  division  into  couples.  And  never,
absolutely never, was I beside Nino, nor was Lila with Bruno. It became natural
for the two of them to be behind. Whenever I turned around suddenly I had the
impression  of  having  caused  a  painful  laceration:  hands,  mouths  springing
backward as if because of some nervous tic.
I suffered but, I have to admit, with a permanent undercurrent of disbelief
that  caused  the  suffering  to  come  in  waves.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was
watching  a  performance  without  substance:  they  were  playing  at  being
together,  both  knowing  well  that  they  were  not  and  couldn’t  be:  the  one
already had a girlfriend, the other was actually married. I looked at them at
times like fallen divinities: once so clever, so intelligent, and now so stupid,
involved in a stupid game. I planned to say to Lila, to Nino, to both of them:
who do you think you are, come back to earth.
I couldn’t do it. In the space of two or three days things changed further.
They began to hold hands without hiding it, with an offensive shamelessness,
as if they had decided that with us it wasn’t worth pretending. They often
quarreled jokingly, then grabbed each other, hit each other, held each other
tight, tumbled on the sand together. When we were walking, if they spotted an
abandoned hut, an old bath house reduced to its foundations, a path that got
lost among the wild vegetation, they decided like children to go exploring and
didn’t invite us to follow. They went off with him in the lead, she behind, in
silence. When they lay in the sun, they lessened the distance between them as
much  as  possible.  At  first  they  were  satisfied  with  the  slight  contact  of
shoulders,  their  arms,  legs,  feet  just  grazing.  Later,  returning  from  that
interminable daily swim, they lay beside each other on Lila’s towel, which was
bigger,  and  soon,  with  a  natural  gesture,  Nino  put  his  arm  around  her
shoulders, she rested her head on his chest. They even, once, went so far as to
kiss  on  the  lips,  a  light,  quick  kiss.  I  thought:  she’s  mad,  they’re  mad.  If
someone from Naples who knows Stefano sees them? If the supplier who got
the house for us passes by? Or if Nunzia, now, should decide to make a visit to
the beach?
I  couldn’t  believe  such  recklessness,  and  yet  time  and  time  again  they
crossed  the  limit.  Seeing  each  other  during  the  day  no  longer  seemed
sufficient; Lila decided that she had to call Stefano every night, but she rudely
rejected Nunzia’s offer to go with us. After dinner she obliged me to go to
Forio. She made a quick phone call to her husband and then we went walking,
she with Nino, I with Bruno. We never returned home before midnight and the
two boys came with us along the dark beach.
On  Friday  night,  that  is,  the  day  before  Stefano  returned,  she  and  Nino
argued, unexpectedly, not in fun but seriously. We were eating ice cream at the
table, Lila had gone to telephone. Nino, grim-faced, took out of his pocket a
number  of  pages  with  writing  on  both  sides  and  began  to  read,  giving  no
explanation, but isolating himself from the dull conversation between Bruno
and me. When she returned, he didn’t even glance at her, he didn’t put the
pages back in his pocket, but went on reading. Lila waited half a minute, then
asked in a lighthearted tone: “Is it so interesting?”
“Yes,” Nino said, without looking up.
“Then read aloud, we want to hear it.”
“It’s my business, it has nothing to do with the rest of you.”
“What is it?” Lila asked, but it was clear that she knew already.
“A letter.”
“From whom?”
“From Nadia.”
With a sudden, lightning-like move, she reached out and tore the pages from
his grasp. Nino started, as if a giant insect had stung him, but he made no effort
to get the letter back, even when Lila began to read it to us in declamatory
tones, in a loud voice. It was a rather childish love letter, carrying on from line
to line with sentimental variations on the theme of missing. Bruno listened
silently, with an embarrassed smile, and I, seeing that Nino showed no sign of
taking the thing as a joke, but was staring darkly at his sandaled, suntanned
feet, whispered to Lila, “That’s enough, give it back to him.”
As soon as I spoke she stopped reading, but her expression of amusement
lingered, and she didn’t give the letter back.
“You’re embarrassed, eh?” she asked. “You’re the one to blame. How can
you have a girlfriend who writes like that?”
Nino said nothing, he went on staring at his feet. Bruno interrupted, also
lightheartedly: “Maybe, when you fall in love with someone, you don’t make
her take an exam to see if she can write a love letter.”
But Lila didn’t even turn to look at him, she spoke to Nino as if they were
continuing in front of us one of their secret conversations: “Do you love her?
And why? Explain it to us. Because she lives on Corso Vittorio Emanuele in a
house full of books and old paintings? Because she speaks in a simpering little
voice? Because she’s the daughter of the professor?”
Finally Nino roused himself and said abruptly, “Give me back those pages.”
“I’ll only give them back if you tear them up immediately, here, in front of
us.”
Countering Lila’s tone of amusement Nino uttered grave monosyllables, with
obvious aggressive undertones. “And then?”
“Then we’ll all write Nadia a letter together in which you tell her you’re
leaving her.”
“And then?”
“We’ll mail it tonight.”
He said nothing for a moment, then he agreed. “Let’s do it.”
Lila pointed to the pages in disbelief.
“You’re really going to tear them up?”
“Yes.”
“And you’ll leave her?”
“Yes. But on one condition.”
“Let’s hear it.”
“That you leave your husband. Now. Let’s all of us go together to the phone
and you’ll tell him.”
Those words provoked in me a violent emotion. At the time I didn’t know
why. As he spoke he raised his voice so unexpectedly that it cracked. And Lila’s
eyes, as she listened to him, suddenly narrowed to slits, following a mode of
behavior that I knew well. Now she would change her tone. Now, I thought,
she’ll turn mean. She said to him, in fact: How dare you. She said to him: To
whom do you think you’re speaking. She said to him: “How can you think of
putting this letter, your foolishness with that whore from a good family, on the
same plane as me, my husband, my marriage and everything that is my life?
You really think you’re something, but you don’t get the joke. In fact you don’t
understand a thing. Nothing, you heard me, and don’t make that face. Let’s go
to bed, Lenù.”
61.
Nino did nothing to restrain us, Bruno said, “See you tomorrow.” We took a
mini  cab  and  returned  to  the  house.  But  during  the  journey  Lila  began  to
tremble, she grabbed my hand and gripped it hard. She began to confess to me
in a chaotic way everything that had happened between her and Nino. She had
yearned for him to kiss her, she had let herself be kissed. She had wanted to
feel his hands on her, she had let him. “I can’t sleep. If I fall asleep I wake with
a start, I look at the clock, I hope it’s already day, that we have to go to the
beach. But it’s night, I can’t sleep anymore, I have in my head all the words he
said, all the ones that I can’t wait to tell him. I resisted. I said: I’m not like
Pinuccia, I can do what I like, I can start and stop, it’s a game. I kept my lips
pressed  together,  then  I  said  to  myself  well,  really,  what’s  a  kiss,  and  I
discovered what it was, I didn’t know—I swear to you that I didn’t know—and
now I can’t do without it. I gave him my hand, I entwined my fingers with his,
tight, and it seemed to me painful to let go. How many things I’ve missed that
now are landing on me all at once. I go around like a girlfriend, when I’m
married.  I’m  frantic,  my  heart  is  pounding  here  in  my  throat  and  in  my
temples. And I like everything. I like that he drags me into secluded places, I
like the fear that someone might see us, I like the idea that they might see us.
Did you do those things with Antonio? Did you suffer when you had to leave
him and you couldn’t wait to see him again? Is it normal, Lenù? Was it like that
for you? I don’t know how it began and when. At first I didn’t like him: I liked
how he talked, what he said, but physically no. I thought: How many things he
knows, this man, I should listen, I should learn. Now, when he speaks, I can’t
even concentrate. I look at his mouth and I’m ashamed of looking at it, I turn
my eyes in another direction. In a short time I’ve come to love everything
about him: his hands, the delicate fingernails, that thinness, the ribs under his
skin, his slender neck, the beard that he shaves badly so it’s always rough, his
nose, the hair on his chest, his long, slender legs, his knees. I want to caress
him. And I think of things that disgust me, they really disgust me, Lenù, but I
would like to do them to give him pleasure, to make him be happy.”
I listened to her for a good part of the night, in her room, the door closed,
the light out. She was lying on the window side and in the moon’s glow the hair
on her neck gleamed, and the curve of her hip. I was lying on the door side,
Stefano’s side, and I thought: Her husband sleeps here, every weekend, on this
side of the bed, and draws her to him, in the afternoon, at night, and embraces
her. And yet here, in this bed, she is telling me about Nino. The words for him
take away her memory, they erase from these sheets every trace of conjugal
love. She speaks of him and in speaking of him she calls him here, she imagines
him next to her, and since she has forgotten herself she perceives no violation
or guilt. She confides, she tells me things that she would do better to keep to
herself. She tells me how much she desires the person I’ve desired forever, and
she does so convinced that I—through insensitivity, through a less acute vision,
through incapacity to grasp what she, instead, is able to grasp—have never
truly understood that same person, never realized his qualities. I don’t know if
it’s in bad faith or  if she’s really convinced—it’s  my fault, my tendency to
conceal myself—that since elementary school I’ve been deaf and blind, so that
it took her to discover, here on Ischia, the power unleashed by the son of
Sarratore. Ah, how I hate this presumption of hers, it poisons my blood. Yet I
don’t know how to say to her, That’s enough, I can’t go to my room to cry in
silence, but I stay here, and now and then I interrupt her, I try to calm her.
I pretended a detachment I didn’t have. “It’s the sea,” I said to her, “the fresh
air, the vacation. And Nino knows how to confuse you; the way he talks he
makes everything look easy. But, unfortunately, tomorrow Stefano arrives and
you’ll see, Nino will seem like a boy to you. Which he really is, I know him well.
To us he seems like somebody, but if you think how Professor Galiani’s son
treats  him—you  remember?—you  understand  immediately  that  we
overestimate him. Of course, compared to Bruno he seems extraordinary, but
after all he’s only the son of a railroad worker who got it in his head to study.
Remember  that  Nino  was  from  the  neighborhood,  he  comes  from  there.
Remember that at school you were smarter, even if he was older. And then you
see  how  he  takes  advantage  of  his  friend,  makes  him  pay  for  everything,
drinks, ice cream.”
It cost me to say those things, I considered them lies. And it was of little use:
Lila grumbled, she objected hesitantly, I refuted her. Until she really got mad
and began to defend Nino in the tone of someone who says: I’m the only one
who knows what sort of person he is. She asked why I was always disparaging
him. She asked me what I had against him. “He helped you,” she said, “he even
wanted to publish that nonsense of yours in a review. Sometimes I don’t like
you, Lenù, you diminish everything and everyone, even people who are lovable
if you just look at them.”
I lost control, I couldn’t bear it anymore. I had spoken ill of the person I
loved in order to do something to make her feel better and now she insulted
me. Finally I managed to say, “Do what you like, I’m going to bed.” But she
immediately changed her tone, she embraced me, she hugged me tight, to keep
me  there,  she  whispered,  “Tell  me  what  to  do.”  I  pushed  her  away  with
annoyance, I whispered that she had to decide herself, I couldn’t decide in her
place. “Pinuccia,” I said, “how did she do it? In the end she behaved better than
you.”
She agreed, we sang the praises of Pinuccia and abruptly she sighed: “All
right, tomorrow I won’t go to the beach and the day after I’ll go back to Naples
with Stefano.”
62.
It was a terrible Saturday. She really didn’t go to the beach, and I didn’t go,
either, but I thought only of Nino and Bruno, who were waiting for us in vain.
And I didn’t dare say: I’ll make a quick trip to the sea, time for a swim and then
I’ll come back. Nor did I dare ask: What should I do, pack the suitcases, are we
going, are we staying? I helped Nunzia clean the house, cook lunch and dinner,
every so often checking on Lila, who didn’t even get up. She stayed in bed
reading and writing in her notebook, and when her mother called her to eat
she didn’t answer, and when she called her again she slammed the door of her
room so violently that the whole house shook.
“Too much sea makes one nervous,” Nunzia said, as we ate lunch alone.
“Yes.”
“And she’s not even pregnant.”
“No.”
In the late afternoon Lila left her bed, ate something, spent hours in the
bathroom.  She  washed  her  hair,  put  on  her  makeup,  chose  a  pretty  green
dress,  but  her  face  remained  sullen.  Still,  she  greeted  her  husband
affectionately and he, seeing her, gave her a movie kiss, a long intense kiss,
with Nunzia and I as embarrassed spectators. Stefano brought greetings from
my family, said that Pinuccia had made no more scenes, recounted in minute
detail how happy the Solaras were with the new shoe styles that Rino and
Fernando were working on. Lila wasn’t pleased by Stefano’s reference to the
new styles, and things between them were spoiled. Until that moment she had
kept a forced smile on her face, but as soon as she heard the name of the
Solaras she became aggressive, and said she didn’t give a damn about those
two, she wouldn’t live her life according to what they thought about this or
that. Stefano was disappointed, he frowned. He realized that the enchantment
of the previous weeks was over, but he answered her with his usual agreeable
half smile, he said that he was only telling her what had happened in the
neighborhood, there was no need to take that tone. It was little use. Lila rapidly
transformed the evening into a relentless conflict. Stefano couldn’t say a word
without hostile criticism from her. They went to bed squabbling and I heard
them quarreling until I fell asleep.
I woke at dawn. I didn’t know what to do: gather my things, wait for Lila to
make a decision; go to the beach, with the risk of running into Nino, something
that Lila would not have forgiven; rack my brains all day as I was already doing,
shut in my room. I decided to leave a note saying that I was going to the
Maronti but would be back in the early afternoon. I wrote that I couldn’t leave
Ischia without seeing Nella. I wrote in good faith, but today I know what was
going on in my mind: I wanted to trust myself to chance; Lila couldn’t reproach
me if I ran into Nino when he had gone to ask his parents for money.
The result was a muddled day and a modest waste of money. I hired a boat,
to take me to the Maronti. I went to the place where the Sarratores usually
camped and found only the umbrella. I looked around, and saw Donato, who
was swimming, and he saw me. He waved in greeting, hurried out of the water,
told me that his wife and children had gone to spend the day in Forio, with
Nino. I was extremely disappointed, the situation was not only ironic, it was
contemptuous; it had taken away the son and delivered me to the sickening
patter of the father.
When I tried to get away to go and see Nella, Sarratore wouldn’t let me go,
he gathered up his things and insisted on coming with me. On the road he
assumed a sentimental tone and without any embarrassment began to speak of
what had happened between us years earlier. He asked me to forgive him, he
murmured that one cannot command one’s heart, he spoke in a melancholy
tone of my beauty then and above all of my present beauty.
“What an exaggeration,” I said, and, while I knew I should be serious and
aloof, I began to laugh out of nervousness.
And though he was encumbered by the umbrella and his things, he would
not  relinquish  a  somewhat  breathless,  rambling  discourse.  He  said  that  in
substance the problem of youth was the lack of eyes to see oneself and feelings
to feel about oneself with objectivity.
“There’s the mirror,” I replied, “and that is objective.”
“The mirror? The mirror is the last thing you can trust. I’ll bet that you feel
less pretty than your two friends.”
“Yes.”
“And yet you are much, much more beautiful than they are. Trust me. Look
what lovely blond hair you have. And what a bearing. You need to confront
and resolve two problems only: the first is your bathing suit, it’s not adequate
to your potential; the second is the style of your glasses. This is really wrong,
Elena: too heavy. You have such a delicate face, so remarkably shaped by the
things you study. What you need is daintier glasses.”
As  I  listened  my  irritation  diminished;  he  was  like  a  scientist  of  female
beauty. Mainly he spoke with such detached expertise that at a certain point
he led me to think: and if it’s true? Maybe I don’t know how to value myself. On
the other hand where is the money to buy suitable clothes, a suitable bathing
suit, suitable glasses? I was about to yield to a complaint about poverty and
wealth  when  he  said  to  me  with  a  smile,  “Besides,  if  you  don’t  trust  my
judgment, you’ll be aware, I hope, of how my son looked at you the time you
came to see us.”
Only then did I realize that he was lying to me. His words were intended to
appeal to my vanity, to make me feel good and drive me toward him in the
need for gratification. I felt stupid, wounded not by him, with his lies, but by
my own stupidity. I cut him short with an increasing rudeness that froze him.
At the house I talked to Nella for a while, I told her that we might all be
returning to Naples that night and I wanted to say goodbye.
“A pity that you’re going.”
“Ah yes.”
“Eat with me.”
“I can’t, I have to go.”
“But if you don’t go, swear that you’ll come again and not so short next time.
Stay with me for a day, or even overnight, since you know there’s the bed. I
have so many things to tell you.”
“Thanks.”
Sarratore interrupted, he said, “We count on it, you know how much we love
you.”
I fled, also because there was a relative of Nella’s who was going to the Port
in a car and I didn’t want to miss the ride.
Along the way Sarratore’s words, surprisingly, even if I only rejected them,
began to dig into me. No, maybe he hadn’t lied. He knew how to see beyond
appearances. He had really had a means of observing his son’s gaze on me. And
if I was pretty, if Nino seriously found me attractive—and I knew it was so: in
the end he had kissed me, he had held my hand—it was time I looked at the
facts for what they were: Lila had taken him from me; Lila had separated him
from me to win him for herself. Maybe she hadn’t done it on purpose, but still
she had done it.
I decided suddenly that I had to find him, see him at all costs. Now that our
departure  was  imminent,  now  that  the  force  of  seduction  that  Lila  had
exercised over him would no longer have a chance to fascinate him, now that
she herself had decided to return to the life that was hers, the relationship
between him and me could begin again. In Naples. In the form of friendship. At
least  we  could  meet  to  talk  about  her.  And  then  we  would  return  to  our
conversations, to our reading. I would demonstrate that I could get interested
in his interests better than Lila, certainly, maybe even better than Nadia. Yes, I
had to speak to him right away, tell him I’m leaving, tell him: let’s see each
other in the neighborhood, in Piazza Nazionale, in Mezzocannone, wherever
you want, but as soon as possible.
I found a minicab, I took it to Forio, to Bruno’s house. I called, no one looked
out. I wandered through the town feeling more and more depressed, then I set
out to walk along the beach. And this time chance apparently decided in my
favor. I had been walking for a long time when I saw before me Nino: he was
happy we had met, a barely controlled happiness. His eyes were too bright, his
gestures excited, his voice overwrought.
“I looked for the two of you yesterday and today. Where’s Lina?”
“With her husband.”
He took an envelope out of his pants pocket, he shoved it into my hand too
forcefully.
“Can you give her this?”
I was annoyed. “It’s pointless, Nino.”
“Give it to her.”
“Tonight we’re leaving, we’ll go back to Naples.”
He had an expression of suffering, he said hoarsely, “Who decided?”
“She did.”
“I don’t believe it.”
“It’s true, she told me last night.”
He thought for a moment, pointed to the envelope.
“Please, give her that anyway, right away.”
“All right.”
“Swear that you will.”
“I told you, yes.”
He walked with me for a long way, saying spiteful things about his mother
and his brothers and sister. They tormented me, he said, luckily they went
back to Barano. I asked him about Bruno. He made a gesture of irritation, he
was studying, he said mean things about him as well.
“And you’re not studying?”
“I can’t.”
His head sank between his shoulders, he grew melancholy. He began to talk
about  the  mistakes  one  makes  because  a  professor,  as  a  result  of  his  own
problems, leads you to believe you’re smart. He realized that the things he
wanted to learn had never really interested him.
“What do you mean? Suddenly?”
“A moment is enough to change the direction of your life completely.”
What was happening to him, with these banal words, I no longer recognized
him. I vowed I would help him return to himself.
“You’re upset now, and you don’t know what you’re saying,” I said in my
best sensible tone. “But as soon as you return to Naples we can see each other,
if you want, and talk.”
He nodded yes, but right afterward cried angrily, “I’m finished with the
university, I want to find a job.”
63.
He came with me almost to the house, so that I was afraid of meeting Stefano
and Lila. I said goodbye in a hurry and went up the stairs.
“Tomorrow morning at nine,” he shouted.
I stopped.
“If we leave I’ll see you in the neighborhood. Look for me there.”
Nino made a sign of no, decisively.
“You won’t leave,” he said, as if he were giving a threatening order to fate.
I gave him a final wave and hurried up the stairs sorry that I hadn’t had a
chance to examine what was in the envelope.
In the house I found an unpleasant atmosphere. Stefano and Nunzia were
whispering together. Lila must be in the bathroom or the bedroom. When I
went  in  they  both  looked  at  me  resentfully.  Stefano  said  grimly,  without
preamble, “Will you tell me what you and she are getting up to?”
“In what sense?”
“She says she’s tired of Ischia, she wants to go to Amalfi.”
“I don’t know anything about it.”
Nunzia intervened but not in her usual motherly way.
“Lenù, don’t put wrong ideas in her head, you can’t throw money out the
window. What does Amalfi have to do with anything? We’ve paid to stay here
until September.”
I got mad, I said, “You are both mistaken: it’s I who do what Lina wants, not
the opposite.”
“Then go and tell her to be reasonable,” Stefano muttered. “I’ll be back next
week, we’ll be together for the mid-August holiday and you’ll see, I’ll show you
a good time. But now I don’t want to hear any nonsense. Shit. You think I’ll
take you to Amalfi? And if you don’t like Amalfi, where do I take you, to Capri?
And then? Cut it out, Lenù.”
His tone intimidated me.
“Where is she?” I asked.
Nunzia indicated the bedroom. I went to Lila sure that I would find the
suitcases packed and her determined to leave, even at the risk of a beating.
Instead she was in her slip, and was sleeping on the unmade bed. All around
was the usual disorder, but the suitcases were piled in a corner, empty. I shook
her.
“Lila.”
She started, asked me right away with a look veiled by sleep: “Where have
you been, did you see Nino?”
“Yes. This is for you.”
I gave her the envelope reluctantly. She opened it, took out a sheet of paper.
She read it and in a flash became radiant, as if an injection of stimulants had
swept away drowsiness and despair.
“What does it say?” I asked cautiously.
“To me nothing.”
“So?”
“It’s for Nadia, he’s leaving her.”
She put the letter back in the envelope and gave it to me, urging me to keep
it carefully hidden.
I stood, confused, with the envelope in my hands. Nino was leaving Nadia?
And  why?  Because  Lila  had  asked  him  to?  So  she  would  win?  I  was
disappointed. He was sacrificing the daughter of Professor Galiani to the game
that he and the wife of the grocer were playing. I said nothing, I stared at Lila
while she got dressed, put on her makeup. Finally I said, “Why did you ask
Stefano that absurd thing, to go to Amalfi? I don’t understand you.”
She smiled.
“I don’t, either.”
We left the room. Lila kissed Stefano affectionately, rubbing against him
happily,  and  we  decided  to  go  with  him  to  the  Port,  Nunzia  and  I  in  the
minicab, he and Lila on the Lambretta. We had some ice cream while we waited
for the boat. Lila was nice to her husband, gave him a thousand bits of advice,
promised to telephone every night. Before he started up the gangplank he put
an arm around my shoulders and whispered in my ear: “I’m sorry, I was really
angry. Without you I don’t know how it would have ended, this time.”
It was a polite statement, and yet I felt in it a sort of ultimatum that meant:
Tell your friend, please, that if she goes too far again, it’s all over.
64.
At the head of the letter was Nadia’s address in Capri. As soon as the boat left
the  shore  carrying  Stefano  away,  Lila  propelled  us  cheerfully  to  the
tobacconist,  bought  a  stamp,  and,  while  I  kept  Nunzia  busy,  recopied  the
address onto the envelope and mailed it.
We  wandered  through  Forio,  but  I  was  too  nervous,  and  kept  talking  to
Nunzia. When we returned to the house I drew Lila into my room and spoke
plainly to her. She listened to me in silence, but with a distracted air, as if on
the one hand she felt the gravity of the things I was saying and on the other
had abandoned herself to thoughts that made every word meaningless. I said
to her, “Lila, I don’t know what you have in mind, but in my view you’re
playing with fire. Now Stefano has left happy and if you telephone him every
night he’ll be even happier. But be careful: he’ll be back in a week and will stay
until August 20th. Do you think you can go on like this? Do you think you can
play  with  people’s  lives?  Do  you  know  that  Nino  doesn’t  want  to  study
anymore, he wants to find a job? What have you put in his head? And why did
you make him leave his girlfriend? Do you want to ruin him? Do you want to
ruin both of you?”
At  that  last  question  she  roused  herself  and  burst  out  laughing,  but
somewhat artificially. She sounded amused, but who knows. She said I ought to
be proud of her, she had made me look good. Why? Because she had been
considered in every way finer than the very fine daughter of my professor.
Because the smartest boy in my school and maybe in Naples and maybe in Italy
and maybe in the world—according to what I said, naturally—had just left that
very  respectable  young  lady,  no  less,  to  please  her,  the  daughter  of  a
shoemaker,  elementary-school  diploma,  wife  of  Carracci.  She  spoke  with
increasing sarcasm and as if she were finally revealing a cruel plan of revenge.
I must have looked angry, she realized it, but for several minutes she continued
in that tone, as if she couldn’t stop herself. Was she serious? Was that her true
state of mind at that moment? I exclaimed:
“Who are you putting on this show for? For me? Do you want to make me
believe that Nino is ready to do anything, however crazy, to please you?”
The laughter disappeared from her eyes, she darkened, abruptly changed
her tone.
“No, I’m lying, it’s completely the opposite. I’m the one who’s prepared to do
anything, and it’s never happened to me with anyone, and I’m glad that it’s
happening now.”
Then, overcome by embarrassment, she went to bed without even saying
goodnight.
I fell into a nervous half sleep, during which I convinced myself that the last
little trickle of words was truer than the torrent that had preceded it.
During  the  week  that  followed  I  had  the  proof.  First  of  all,  as  early  as
Monday I realized that Bruno, after Pinuccia’s departure, really had begun to
focus on me, and he now considered that the moment had arrived to behave
toward me as Nino behaved with Lila. While we were swimming he clumsily
pulled me toward him to kiss me, so that I swallowed a mouthful of water and
had to return to the shore coughing. I was annoyed, he saw it. When he came
to lie down in the sun next to me, with the air of a beaten dog, I made a kind
but firm little speech, whose sense was: Bruno, you’re very nice, but between
you and me there can’t be anything but a fraternal feeling. He was sad but he
didn’t give up. The same night, after the phone call to Stefano, we all went to
walk on the beach and then we sat on the cold sand and stretched out to look
at the stars, Lila resting on her elbows, Nino with his head on her stomach, I
with my head on Nino’s stomach, Bruno with his head on my stomach. We
gazed at the constellations, praising the portentous architecture of the sky
with trite formulas. Not all of us, Lila didn’t. She was silent, but when we had
exhausted the catalogue of worshipful wonder, she said that the spectacle of
night frightened her, she saw no structure but only random shards of glass in a
blue pitch. This silenced us all, and I was vexed: she had that habit of speaking
last, which gave her time to reflect and allowed her to disrupt with a single
remark everything that we had more or less thoughtlessly said.
“How can you be afraid,” I exclaimed. “It’s beautiful.”
Bruno  immediately  agreed.  Nino  instead  encouraged  her:  with  a  slight
movement he signaled me to free his stomach, he sat up and began to talk to
her as if they were alone. The sky, the temple, order, disorder. Finally they got
up and, still talking, disappeared into the darkness.
I was lying down but leaning on my elbows. I no longer had Nino’s warm
body as a pillow, and the weight of Bruno’s head on my stomach was irritating.
I said excuse me, touching his hair. He sat up, grabbed me by the waist, pressed
his face against my chest. I muttered no, but he pushed me down on the sand
and searched for my mouth, pressing one hand hard against my breast. Then I
shoved him away, forcefully, crying, Stop it, and this time I was unpleasant, I
hissed, “I don’t like you, how do I have to tell you?” He stopped, embarrassed,
sat up. He said in a low voice: “Is it possible that you don’t like me even a
little?” I tried to explain that it wasn’t a thing that could be measured, saying,
“It’s not a matter of more beauty or less, more liking or less; it’s that some
people  attract  me  and  others  don’t,  it’s  nothing  to  do  with  how  they  are
really.”
“You don’t like me?”
I said impatiently, “No.”
But  as  soon  as  I  uttered  that  monosyllable  I  burst  into  tears,  while
stammering things like “See, I’m crying for no reason, I’m an idiot, I’m not
worth wasting time on.”
He  touched  my  cheek  with  his  fingers  and  tried  again  to  embrace  me,
murmuring: I want to give you so many presents, you deserve them, you’re so
pretty.  I  pulled  away  angrily,  and  shouted  into  the  darkness,  my  voice
cracking, “Lila, come back right now, I want to go home.”
The two friends went with us to the foot of the stairs, then they left. As Lila
and I went up I said in exasperation, “Go where you like, do what you like, I’m
not going with you anymore. It’s the second time Bruno has put his hands on
me: I don’t want to be alone with him anymore, is that clear?”
65.
There are moments when we resort to senseless formulations and advance
absurd claims to hide straightforward feelings. Today I know that in other
circumstances,  after  some  resistance,  I  would  have  given  in  to  Bruno’s
advances.  I  wasn’t  attracted  to  him,  certainly,  but  I  hadn’t  been  especially
attracted  to  Antonio,  either.  One  becomes  affectionate  toward  men  slowly,
whether they coincide or not with whomever in the various phases of life we
have taken as the model of a man. And Bruno Soccavo, in that phase of his life,
was courteous and generous; it would have been easy to harbor some affection
for him. But the reasons for rejecting him had nothing to do with anything
really disagreeable about him. The truth was that I wanted to restrain Lila. I
wanted to be a hindrance to her. I wanted her to be aware of the situation she
was getting into and getting me into. I wanted her to say to me: Yes, you’re
right, I’m making a mistake, I won’t go off in the dark with Nino anymore, I
won’t  leave  you  alone  with  Bruno;  starting  now  I  will  behave  as  befits  a
married woman.
Naturally it didn’t happen. She confined herself to saying, “I’ll talk to Nino
about it and you’ll see, Bruno won’t bother you anymore.” So day after day we
continued to meet the boys at nine in the morning and separated at midnight.
But on Tuesday night after the call to Stefano, Nino said, “You’ve never been to
see Bruno’s house. You want to come over?”
I immediately said no, I pretended I had a stomachache and wanted to go
home. Nino and Lila looked uncertainly at each other, Bruno said nothing. I felt
the  weight  of  their  discontent  and  added,  embarrassed,  “Maybe  another
night.”
Lila said nothing but when we were alone she exclaimed, “You can’t make
my life unhappy, Lenù.” I answered, “If Stefano finds out that we went alone to
their house, he’ll be angry not just at you but also at me.” And I didn’t stop
there. At home I stirred up Nunzia’s displeasure and used it to urge her to
reproach  her  daughter  for  too  much  sun,  too  much  sea,  staying  out  till
midnight. I even went so far as to say, as if I wished to make peace between
mother and daughter, “Signora Nunzia, tomorrow night come and have ice
cream  with  us,  you’ll  see  we’re  not  doing  anything  wrong.”  Lila  became
furious, she said that she had had a miserable life all year, always shut up in the
grocery, and now she had the right to a little freedom. Nunzia also lost her
temper:  “Lina,  what  are  you  saying?  Freedom?  What  freedom?  You  are
married, you must be accountable to your husband. Lenuccia can want a little
freedom, you can’t.” Her daughter went to her room and slammed the door.
But  the  next  day  Lila  won:  her  mother  stayed  home  and  we  went  to
telephone  Stefano.  “You  must  be  here  at  eleven  on  the  dot,”  Nunzia  said,
grumpily, addressing me, and I answered, “All right.” She gave me a long,
questioning look. By now she was alarmed: she was our guard but she wasn’t
guarding us; she was afraid we were getting into trouble, but she thought of
her  own  sacrificed  youth  and  didn’t  want  to  keep  us  from  some  innocent
amusement. I repeated to reassure her: “At eleven.”
The phone call to Stefano lasted a minute at most. When Lila came out of the
booth Nino asked, “Are you feeling well tonight, Lenù? Come see the house?”
“Come on,” Bruno urged me. “You can have a drink and then go.”
Lila agreed, I said nothing. On the outside the building was old, shabby, but
inside it had been renovated: the cellar white and well lighted, full of wine and
cured meats; a marble staircase with a wrought-iron banister; sturdy doors on
which gold handles shone; windows with gilded fixtures. There were a lot of
rooms,  yellow  couches,  a  television;  in  the  kitchen,  cupboards  painted
aquamarine and in the bedrooms wardrobes that were like gothic churches. I
thought,  for  the  first  time  clearly,  that  Bruno  really  was  rich,  richer  than
Stefano. I thought that if ever my mother had known that the student son of
the owner of Soccavo mortadella had courted me, and that I had been, no less,
a guest at his house, and that instead of thanking God for the good fortune he
had sent me and seeking to marry him I had rejected him twice, she would
have beaten me. On the other hand it was precisely the thought of my mother,
of her lame leg, that made me feel unfit even for Bruno. In that house I was
intimidated. Why was I there, what was I doing there? Lila acted nonchalant,
she laughed often; I felt as if I had a fever, a nasty taste in my mouth. I began to
say yes to avoid the embarrassment of saying no. Do you want a drink of this,
do you want to put on this record, do you want to watch television, do you
want  some  ice  cream.  When,  finally,  I  realized  that  Nino  and  Lila  had
disappeared, I was worried. Where had they gone? Was it possible that they
were in Nino’s bedroom? Possible that Lila was willing to cross even that limit?
Possible that—I didn’t want to think about it. I jumped up, I said to Bruno: “It’s
late.”
He was kind, but with an undertone of sadness. He murmured, “Stay a little
longer.” He said that the next day he had to leave very early, to attend a family
celebration. He announced that he would be gone until Monday and those days
without me would be a torment. He took my hand delicately, said that he loved
me and other things like that. I gently took my hand away, he didn’t try for any
other contact. Instead, he spoke at length about his feelings for me, he who in
general said little, and I had trouble interrupting him. When I did I said, “I
really have to go,” then, in a louder voice, “Lila, please come, it’s quarter after
ten.”
Some minutes passed, the two reappeared. Nino and Bruno took us to a taxi,
Bruno said goodbye as if he were going not to Naples for a few days but to
America for the rest of his life. On the way home Lila, her tone pointed, as if
she  were  delivering  important  news:  “Nino  told  me  that  he  has  a  lot  of
admiration for you.”
“Not me,” I answered right away, in a rude voice. And then I whispered:
“What if you get pregnant?”
She said in my ear: “There’s no danger. We’re just kissing and holding.”
“Oh.”
“And anyway I don’t stay pregnant.”
“It happened once.”
“I told you, I don’t stay pregnant. He knows how to manage.”
“He who?”
“Nino. He would use a condom.”
“What’s that?”
“I don’t know, he called it that.”
“You don’t know what it is and you trust it?”
“It’s something that he puts over it.”
“Over where?”
I wanted to force her to name things. I wanted her to understand what she
was saying. First she assured me that they were only kissing, then she spoke of
him as someone who knew how not to get her pregnant. I was enraged, I
expected  that  she  would  be  ashamed.  Instead  she  seemed  pleased  with
everything that had happened to her and that would happen to her. So much
so that when we got home she was nice to Nunzia, pointed out that we had
returned early, got ready for bed. But she left her door open and when she saw
me going to my room she called me, she said, “Stay here a minute, close the
door.”
I sat on the bed, but trying to make it clear that I was tired of her and
everything.
“What do you have to tell me?”
She whispered, “I want to go and sleep at Nino’s.”
I was astonished.
“And Nunzia?”
“Wait, don’t get mad. There’s not much time left, Lenù. Stefano will arrive
on Saturday, he’ll stay for ten days, then we go back to Naples. And everything
will be over.”
“Everything what?”
“This, these days, these evenings.”
We discussed it for a long time, she seemed very lucid. She murmured that
nothing like this would ever happen to her again. She whispered that she loved
him, that she wanted him. She used that verb, amare, that we had found only in
books and in the movies, that no one used in the neighborhood, I would say it
at most to myself, we all preferred voler bene. She no, she loved. She loved Nino.
But she knew very well that that love had to be suffocated, every occasion for
it to breathe had to be removed. And she would do it, she would do it starting
Saturday night. She had no doubts, she would be capable of it, and I had to
trust her. But the very little time that remained she wished to devote to Nino.
“I want to stay in a bed with him for a whole night and a whole day,” she
said. “I want to sleep holding him and being held, and kiss him when I feel like
it, caress him when I feel like it, even while he’s sleeping. Then that’s it.”
“It’s impossible.”
“You have to help me.”
“How?”
“You have to convince my mother that Nella has invited us to spend two
days at Barano and that we’ll spend the night there.”
I was silent for a moment. So she already had a project, she had a plan.
Clearly she had worked it out with Nino, maybe he had even sent Bruno away
on purpose. For how long had they been deciding the how, the where? No
more  speeches  on  neocapitalism,  on  neocolonialism,  on  Africa,  on  Latin
America, on Beckett, on Bertrand Russell. Mere doodles. Nino no longer talked
about  anything.  Their  brilliant  minds  now  were  exercised  only  on  how  to
deceive Nunzia and Stefano, using me.
“You’re out of your mind,” I said, furiously, “even if your mother believes
you your husband never will.”
“You persuade her to send us to Barano and I’ll persuade her not to tell
Stefano.”
“No.”
“Aren’t we friends anymore?”
“No.”
“You’re not Nino’s friend anymore?”
“No.”
But Lila knew how to draw me in. And I was unable to resist: on the one hand
I said that’s enough, on the other I was depressed at the idea of not being part
of her life, of the means by which she invented it for herself. What was that
deception but another of her fantastic moves, which were always full of risks?
The two of us together, allied with each other, in the struggle against all. We
would devote the next day to overcoming Nunzia’s opposition. The day after
that we would leave early, together. At Forio we would separate. She would go
to Bruno’s house with Nino, I would take the boat for the Maronti. She would
spend the whole day and the whole night with Nino, I would be at Nella’s and
sleep in Barano. The next day I would return to Forio for lunch, we would see
each other at Bruno’s, and together would return home. Perfect. The more her
mind was ignited as, in minute detail, she planned how to make every part of
the ruse add up, the more skillfully she ignited mine, too, and she hugged me,
begged me. Here was a new adventure, together. Here was how we would take
what life didn’t want to give us. Here. Or would I rather that she be deprived of
that joy, that Nino should suffer, that both should lose the light of reason and
end up not capably managing their desire but being dangerously overwhelmed
by  it?  There  was  a  moment,  that  night,  when,  by  following  her  along  the
thread  of  her  arguments,  I  came  to  think  that  to  support  her  in  this
undertaking, besides being an important milestone for our long sisterhood,
was also the way of manifesting my love—she said friendship, but I desperately
thought: love, love love—for Nino. And it was at that point that I said: “All
right, I’ll help you.”
66.
The next day I told Nunzia many lies that were so disgraceful I was ashamed.
At the center of the lies I placed Maestra Oliviero, who was in Potenza, in
goodness  knows  what  terrible  conditions,  and  it  was  my  idea,  not  Lila’s.
“Yesterday,” I said to Nunzia, “I met Nella Incardo, and she told me that her
cousin, who is convalescing, has come to stay with her for a vacation at the
seaside that will finally restore her health. Tomorrow night Nella’s having a
party for the teacher and she invited me and Lila, who were her best students.
We would really like to go, but it will be late and so impossible. But Nella has
said that we can sleep at her house.”
“In Barano?” Nunzia asked, frowning.
“Yes, the party is there.”
“You go, Lenù, Lila can’t, her husband will get mad.”
Lila threw in, “Let’s not tell him.”
“What do you mean?”
“Mamma, he’s in Naples and I’m here, he’ll never find out.”
“One way or another things are always found out.”
“Well, no.”
“Yes, and that’s enough. Lina, I don’t want to discuss it further: if Lenuccia
wants to go, fine, but you stay here.”
We went on for a good hour, I making the point that the teacher was very
sick and this might be our last chance to show her our gratitude, and Lila
pressing her like this: “How many lies have you told Papa, admit it, and not for
bad reasons but for good ones, to have a moment to yourself, to do a just thing
that he would never allow.” Wavering, Nunzia first said that she had never told
the tiniest lie to Fernando; then she admitted that she had told one, two, many;
finally  she  cried  with  rage  and  at  the  same  time  maternal  pride,  “What
happened when I conceived you, an accident, a hiccup, a convulsion, the lights
went out, a bulb blew, the basin of water fell off the night table? Certainly
there must have been something, if you were born so intolerable, so different
from the others.” And here she grew sad, she seemed to soften. But soon she
was indignant again, she said you don’t tell lies to a husband just to see a
schoolteacher. And Lila exclaimed, “To Maestra Oliviero I owe the little I know,
the only school I had was with her.” And in the end Nunzia gave in. But she
insisted on a precise timetable: Saturday at exactly two o’clock we were to be
home again. Not a minute later. “If Stefano arrives early and doesn’t find you?
Really, Lina, don’t put me in an ugly situation. Clear?”
“Clear.”
We went to the beach. Lila was radiant, she embraced me, she kissed me, she
said that she would be grateful for her whole life. But I already felt guilty about
that evocation of Maestra Oliviero, whom I had placed at the center of a party,
in Barano, imagining her as she was when, full of energy, she taught us, and
not as, instead, she must be now, worse than when she was taken away in the
ambulance, worse than when I had seen her in the hospital. My satisfaction in
having invented an effective lie vanished, I lost the frenzy of complicity, I
became resentful again. I asked myself why I supported Lila, why I covered for
her: in fact she wanted to betray her husband, she wanted to violate the sacred
bond of marriage, she wanted to tear off her condition of wife, she wanted to
do a thing that would provoke Stefano, if he should find out, to bash her head
in.  Suddenly  I  remembered  what  she  had  done  to  the  wedding-dress
photograph and I felt sick to my stomach. Now, I thought, she is behaving in
the same way, and not with a photograph but with the very person of Signora
Carracci. And in this case, too, she pulls me in to help her. Nino is a tool, yes,
yes. Like the scissors, the paste, the paint, he is being used to disfigure her.
Toward what terrible act is she driving me? And why do I let myself be driven?
We found him waiting for us at the beach. He asked anxiously: “So?”
She said, “Yes.”
They ran off to swim without even inviting me, and, besides, I wouldn’t have
gone. I felt chilled by anxiety, and then why swim, to stay near the shore alone,
with my fear of the deep water?
There was some wind, some strips of cloud, the sea was a little rough. They
dived in without hesitation, Lila with a long cry of joy. They were happy, full of
their own romance, they had the energy of those who successfully seize what
they desire, no matter the cost. Moving with determined strokes, they were
immediately lost amid the waves.
I felt chained to an intolerable pact of friendship. How tortuous everything
was. It was I who had dragged Lila to Ischia. I had used her to pursue Nino,
hopelessly.  I  had  relinquished  the  money  from  the  bookstore  on  Via
Mezzocannone for the money that she gave me. I had put myself in her service
and now I was playing the role of the servant who comes to the aid of her
mistress. I was covering for her adultery. I was preparing it. I was helping her
take Nino, take him in my place, be fucked—yes, fucked—fucked by him for a
whole day and a whole night, give him blow jobs. My temples began to throb, I
kicked the sand with my heel once, twice, three times, it was a thrill to hear
echoing  in  my  head  childhood  words,  overloaded  with  sex  imagined  in
ignorance.  High  school  disappeared,  the  wonderful  sonority  of  the  books
disappeared, of the translations from Greek and Latin. I stared at the sparkling
sea,  and  the  long  livid  array  of  clouds  that  was  moving  from  the  horizon
toward the blue sky, toward the white streak of condensation, and I could
barely see them, Nino and Lila, black dots. I couldn’t tell if they were swimming
toward the mass of clouds on the horizon or turning back. I wished that they
would drown and that death would take from them the joys of the next day.
67.
I heard someone calling me, I turned suddenly.
“So I had good eyesight,” said a teasing male voice.
“I told you it was her,” said a female voice.
I recognized them immediately, I sat up. It was Michele Solara and Gigliola,
along with her brother, a boy of twelve called Lello.
I welcomed them warmly, even though I never said: Sit down. I hoped that
for some reason they were in a hurry, that they would leave right away, but
Gigliola spread her towel, along with Michele’s, carefully on the sand, placed
her purse on it, cigarettes, lighter, said to her brother: lie down on the hot
sand, because the wind’s blowing, your bathing suit’s wet and you’ll catch cold.
What to do. I made an effort not to look toward the sea, as if in that way it
wouldn’t occur to them to look at it, and I paid happy attention to Michele,
who started talking in his usual unemotional, careless tone. They had taken a
holiday, it was too hot in Naples. Boat in the morning, boat in the evening,
good air. Since Pinuccia and Alfonso were in the shop on Piazza dei Martiri, or,
rather,  no,  Alfonso  and  Pinuccia,  because  Pinuccia  didn’t  do  much,  while
Alfonso was great. It was on Pina’s recommendation that they had decided to
come to Forio. You’ll find them, she had said, just walk along the beach. And in
fact, they had walked and walked, Gigliola had shouted: Isn’t that Lenuccia?
And here we are. I kept saying what a pleasure, and meanwhile Michele got up
absent-mindedly, with his sandy feet on Gigliola’s towel, so she reproached
him—“Pay a little attention”—but in vain. Now that he had finished the story
of why they were on Ischia, I knew that the real question was about to arrive, I
read it in his eyes even before he said it: “Where’s Lina?”
“She’s swimming.”
“In this sea?”
“It’s not too rough.”
It was inevitable, both he and Gigliola turned to look at the sea, with its curls
of foam. But they did it distractedly, they were settling themselves on the
towels. Michele argued with the boy, who wanted to go swimming again. “Stay
here,”  he  said,  “you  want  to  drown?”  He  stuck  a  comic  book  in  his  hand,
adding, to his girlfriend, “We’re never taking him again.”
Gigliola complimented me profusely: “How well you look, all tanned, and
your hair is even lighter.”
I smiled, I was self-deprecating, but I was thinking only: I’ve got to find a
way to get them out of here.
“Come rest at the house,” I said. “Nunzia’s there, she’ll be very happy.”
They refused, they had to catch the boat in a couple of hours, they preferred
to have a little more sun and then they would head off on their walk.
“So let’s go to the bath house, we’ll get something to eat there,” I said.
“Yes, but let’s wait for Lina.”
As always in tense situations, I undertook to blot out the time with words,
and I started off with a flurry of questions, anything that came into my head:
How  was  Spagnuolo  the  pastry  maker,  how  was  Marcello,  if  he’d  found  a
girlfriend, what did Michele think of the shoe designs, and what did his father
think and what did his mamma think of them, and what did his grandfather
think. At one point I got up, I said, “I’ll call Lina,” and I went down to the
water’s  edge,  I  began  to  shout:  “Lina,  come  back,  Michele  and  Gigliola  are
here,” but it was useless, she didn’t hear me. I went back, and started talking
again to distract them. I hoped that Lila and Nino, returning to shore, would
become aware of the danger before Gigliola and Michele saw them and avoid
any intimate attitude. But though Gigliola listened to me, Michele wasn’t even
polite enough to pretend. He had come to Ischia purposely to see Lila and talk
to her about the new shoes, I was sure of it, and he cast long glances at the sea,
which was getting rougher.
Finally he saw her. He saw her as she came out of the water, her hand
entwined in Nino’s, a handsome couple who would not pass unobserved, both
tall, both naturally elegant, shoulders touching, smiles exchanged. They were
so  entranced  with  themselves  that  they  didn’t  immediately  realize  I  had
company. When Lila recognized Michele and pulled her hand away, it was too
late. Maybe Gigliola didn’t notice, and her brother was reading the comic book,
but  Michele  saw  and  turned  to  look  at  me  as  if  to  read  on  my  face  the
verification of what he had just had before his eyes. He must have found it, in
the form of fear. He said gravely, in the slow voice that he assumed when he
had  to  deal  with  something  that  required  speed  and  decisiveness:  “Ten
minutes, just the time to say hello, and we’ll go.”
In fact they stayed more than an hour. Michele, when he heard Nino’s last
name—introducing him I placed great emphasis on the fact that he was our
schoolmate in elementary school as well as my classmate in high school—asked
the most irritating question: “You’re the son of the guy who writes for Roma
and for Napoli Notte?”
Nino nodded unwillingly, and Michele stared at him for a long instant, as if
he wanted to find in his eyes confirmation of that relationship. Then he did not
speak to him again, he spoke only and always to Lila.
Lila was friendly, ironic, at times deceitful.
Michele said to her, “That blowhard your brother swears he thought up the
new shoes.”
“It’s the truth.”
“So that’s why they’re garbage.”
“You’ll see, that garbage will sell even better than the preceding.”
“Maybe, but only if you come to the store.”
“You already have Gigliola, who’s doing great.”
“I need Gigliola in the pastry shop.”
“Your problem, I have to stay in the grocery.”
“You’ll see, you’ll move to Piazza dei Martiri, signò, and you’ll have carte
blanche.”
“Carte blanche, carte noir, get it out of your head, I’m fine where I am.”
And  so  on  in  this  tone,  they  seemed  to  be  playing  tamburello  with  their
words. Every so often Gigliola or I tried to say something, mainly Gigliola, who
was furious at the way her fiancé talked about her fate without even consulting
her. As for Nino, he was—I realized—stunned, or perhaps astonished at how
Lila, skillful and fearless, found the phrases, in dialect, to match Michele’s.
Finally  the  young  Solara  announced  that  they  had  to  go,  they  had  an
umbrella with their belongings quite far away. He said goodbye to me, he said
goodbye warmly to Lila, repeating that he would expect her in the store in
September. To Nino he said seriously, as if to a subordinate whom one asks to
go and buy a pack of Nationals, “Tell your papa that he was wrong to write that
he didn’t like the way the store looked. When you take money, you have to
write that everything’s great, otherwise no more money.”
Nino was caught by surprise, perhaps by humiliation, and didn’t answer.
Gigliola held out her hand, he gave her his mechanically. The couple went off,
dragging the boy, who was reading the comic book as he walked.
68.
I was enraged, frightened, unhappy with my every word or gesture. As soon
as Michele and Gigliola were far enough away I said to Lila, so that Nino could
also hear me: “He saw you.”
Nino asked uneasily, “Who is he?”
“A shit Camorrist who thinks he’s God’s gift,” said Lila contemptuously.
I corrected her immediately, Nino should know: “He’s one of her husband’s
partners. He’ll tell Stefano everything.”
“What everything,” Lila protested, “there’s nothing to tell.”
“You know perfectly well that they’ll tell on you.”
“Yes? And who gives a damn.”
“I give a damn.”
“Don’t worry. Because even if you won’t help me, things will go as they
should go.”
And as if I weren’t present, she went on to make arrangements with Nino for
the next day. But while she, precisely because of that encounter with Michele
Solara, seemed to have multiplied her energies, he seemed like a windup toy
that has run down. He murmured: “Are you sure you won’t get yourself in
trouble because of me?”
Lila caressed his cheek. “You don’t want to anymore?”
The caress seemed to revive him. “I’m just worried for you.”
We soon left Nino, we returned home. Along the way I sketched catastrophic
scenarios—“Michele will talk to Stefano tonight, Stefano will rush over here
tomorrow  morning,  he  won’t  find  you  at  home,  Nunzia  will  send  him  to
Barano, he won’t find you at Barano, either, you’ll lose everything, Lila, listen
to me, you’ll ruin not only yourself but you’ll ruin me, too, my mother will kill
me”—but she confined herself to listening absent-mindedly, smiling, repeating
in varying formulations a single idea: I love you, Lenù, and I will always love
you; so I hope that you feel at least once in your life what I’m feeling at this
moment.
Then I thought: so much the worse for you. We stayed home that night. Lila
was nice to her mother, she wanted to cook, she wanted her to be served, she
cleared, washed the dishes, sat on her lap, put her arms around her neck,
resting her forehead against hers with an unexpected sadness. Nunzia, who
wasn’t used to those kindnesses and must have found them embarrassing, at a
certain point burst into tears and amid her tears uttered a phrase convoluted
by anxiety: “Please, Lina, no mother has ever had a daughter like you, don’t
make me die of sorrow.”
Lila made fun of her affectionately and took her to her room. In the morning
she dragged me out of bed; part of me was so anguished that it didn’t want to
get up and be conscious of the day. In the mini cab to Forio, I laid out other
terrible scenarios that left her completely indifferent. “Nella’s gone”; “Nella
really has guests and has no room for me”; “The Sarratores decide to come
here to Forio to visit their son.” She continued to reply in a joking tone: “If
Nella’s gone, Nino’s mother will welcome you”; “If there’s no room you’ll come
back and sleep at our house”; “If the whole Sarratore family knocks at the door
of Bruno’s house we won’t open it.” And we went on like that until, a little
before nine, we arrived at our destination. Nino was at the window waiting, he
hurried to open the door. He gave me a nod of greeting, he drew Lila inside.
What until that door could still be avoided from that moment became an
unstoppable mechanism. In the same cab, at Lila’s expense, I was taken to
Barano. On the way I realized that I couldn’t truly hate them. I felt bitterness
toward Nino, I certainly had some hostile feelings toward Lila, I could even
wish death  on both  of them,  but  almost as  a kind  of incantation  that  was
capable, paradoxically, of saving all three of us. Hatred no. Rather, I hated
myself, I despised myself. I was there, I was there on the island, the air stirred
by the cab’s movement assailed me with the intense odors of the vegetation
from which night was evaporating. But it was a mortified presence, submissive
to the demands of others. I was living in them, unobtrusively. I couldn’t cancel
out  the  images  of  the  embraces,  kisses  in  the  empty  house.  Their  passion
invaded me, disturbed me. I loved them both and so I couldn’t love myself, feel
myself, affirm myself with a need for life of my own, one that had the same
blind, mute force as theirs. So it seemed to me.
69.
I was greeted by Nella and the Sarratore family with the usual enthusiasm. I
assumed my humblest mask, the mask of my father when he collected tips, the
elaborate mask of my forebears—always fearful, always subordinate, always
pleasingly willing—by which to avoid danger, and I went from lie to lie in a
pleasant manner. I said to Nella that if I had decided to come and disturb her it
wasn’t by choice but necessity. I said that the Carraccis had guests, that there
was no room for me that night. I said that I hoped I hadn’t presumed too much
in  showing  up  like  this,  unexpectedly,  and  that  if  there  were  difficulties  I
would return to Naples for a few days.
Nella embraced me, fed me, swearing that to have me in the house was an
immense pleasure for her. I refused to go to the beach with the Sarratores,
although  the  children  protested.  Lidia  insisted  that  I  join  them  soon  and
Donato declared that he would wait for me so we could swim together. I stayed
with  Nella,  helped  her  straighten  the  house,  cook  lunch.  For  a  moment
everything weighed on me less: the lies, the images of the adultery that was
taking place, my complicity, a jealousy that couldn’t be defined because I felt at
the same time jealous of Lila who was giving herself to Nino, of Nino who was
giving himself to Lila. In the meantime, Nella, talking about the Sarratores,
seemed less hostile. She said that husband and wife had found an equilibrium
and since they were getting along they gave her less trouble. She told me about
Maestra Oliviero: she had telephoned her in order to tell her that I had come to
see her, and she had been very tired but more optimistic. For a while, in other
words, there was a tranquil flow of news. But a few remarks were enough, an
unexpected detour, and the weight of the situation I was involved in returned
forcefully.
“She praised you a lot,” Nella said, speaking of Maestra Oliviero, “but when
she found out that you came to see me with your two married friends she
asked a lot of questions, especially about Signora Lina.”
“What did she say?”
“She said that in her entire career as a teacher she never had such a good
student.”
The evocation of Lila’s old primacy disturbed me.
“It’s true,” I admitted.
But Nella made a grimace of absolute disagreement, her eyes lit up.
“My cousin is an exceptional teacher,” she said, “and yet in my view this
time she is wrong.”
“No, she’s not wrong.”
“Can I tell you what I think?”
“Of course.”
“It won’t upset you?”
“No.”
“I didn’t like Signora Lina. You are much better, you’re prettier and more
intelligent. I talked about it with the Sarratores, too, and they agree with me.”
“You say that because you love me.”
“No. Pay attention, Lenù. I know that you are good friends, my cousin told
me. And I don’t want to interfere in things that have nothing to do with me.
But a glance is enough for me to judge people. Signora Lina knows that you’re
better than her and so she doesn’t love you the way you love her.”
I smiled, pretending skepticism. “Does she hate me?”
“I don’t know. But she knows how to wound, it’s written in her face, it’s
enough to look at her forehead and her eyes.”
I  shook  my  head,  I  repressed  my  satisfaction.  Ah,  if  it  were  all  so
straightforward. But I already knew—although not the way I do today—that
between the two of us everything was more tangled. And I joked, laughed,
made Nella laugh. I told her that Lila never made a good impression the first
time. Since she was little she had seemed like a devil, and she really was, but in
a good way. She had a quick mind and did well in whatever she happened to
apply herself to: if she could have studied she would have become a scientist
like Madame Curie or a great novelist like Grazia Deledda, or even like Nilde
Iotti, the lover of Togliatti. And hearing those last two names, Nella exclaimed,
oh Madonna, and ironically made the sign of the cross. Then she gave a little
laugh, then another, and she couldn’t contain herself, she wanted to whisper a
secret, a very funny thing that Sarratore had said to her. Lila, according to him,
had an almost ugly beauty, a type that males are, yes, enchanted by but also
fear.
“What fear?” I asked, also in a low voice.
And she, in an even lower voice, “The fear that their thingy won’t function
or it will fall off or she’ll pull out a knife and cut it off.”
She laughed, her chest heaved, her eyes became teary. She couldn’t contain
herself for quite some time and I felt an unease I had never felt with her
before. It wasn’t my mother’s laughter, the obscene laughter of the woman
who knows. In Nella’s there was something chaste and yet vulgar, it was the
laugh of an aging virgin that assailed me and pushed me to laugh, too, but in a
forced way. A smart woman like her, I said to myself, why does this amuse her?
And  meanwhile  I  saw  myself  growing  old,  with  that  laugh  of  malicious
innocence in my breast. I thought: I’ll end up laughing like that, too.
70.
The Sarratores arrived for lunch. They left a trail of sand on the floor, an
odor of sea and sweat, a lighthearted reproach because the children had waited
for me in vain. I set the table, cleared, washed the dishes, followed Pino, Clelia,
and Ciro to the edge of a thicket to help them cut reeds to make a kite. With
the children I was happy. While their parents rested, while Nella napped on a
lounge  chair  on  the  terrace,  the  time  slipped  by,  the  kite  absorbed  me
completely, I scarcely thought of Nino and Lila.
In the late afternoon we all went to the beach, even Nella, to fly the kite. I
ran back and forth on the beach followed by the three children, who were
silent, amazed, when the kite appeared to rise and they cried out when they
saw it hit the sand after an unexpected pirouette. I kept trying but I couldn’t
make it fly, in spite of the instructions that Donato shouted to me from under
the umbrella. Finally, all sweaty, I gave up, and said to Pino, Clelia, and Ciro,
“Ask Papa.” Dragged by his children, Sarratore came and checked the weave of
the reeds, the blue tissue paper, the thread, then he studied the wind and
began  to  run  backward,  leaping  energetically  despite  his  heavy  body.  The
children ran beside him in their excitement, and I also revived, I began to run
along with them, until their expanding happiness was transmitted to me, too.
Our kite traveled higher and higher, it flew, there was no need to run, you had
only to hold the string. Sarratore was a good father. He demonstrated that with
his help Ciro could hold it, and Clelia, and Pino, and even me. He handed it to
me, in fact, but he stood behind me, he breathed on my neck and said, “Like
that, good, pull a little, let it go,” and it was evening.
We had dinner, the Sarratore family went for a walk in the town, husband,
wife, and three children, sunburned and dressed up. Although they urged me
to come, I stayed with Nella. We cleaned up, she helped me make the bed in the
usual corner of the kitchen, we sat on the terrace in the cool air. The moon
wasn’t visible, in the dark sky there were swells of white clouds. We talked
about how pretty and intelligent the Sarratore children were, and Nella fell
asleep. Then, suddenly, the day, the night that was beginning, fell on me. I left
the house on tiptoe, I went toward the Maronti.
Who knows if Michele Solara had kept to himself what he had seen. Who
knows if everything was going smoothly. Who knows if Nunzia was already
asleep in the house on the road in Cuotto or was trying to calm her son-in-law
who had arrived unexpectedly on the last boat, hadn’t found his wife and was
furious. Who knows if Lila had telephoned her husband and, reassured that he
was in Naples, far away, in the apartment in the new neighborhood, was now
in bed with Nino, without fear, a secret couple, a couple intent on enjoying the
night. Everything in the world was in precarious balance, pure risk, and those
who didn’t agree to take the risk wasted away in a corner, without getting to
know life. I understood suddenly why I hadn’t had Nino, why Lila had had him.
I wasn’t capable of entrusting myself to true feelings. I didn’t know how to be
drawn beyond the limits. I didn’t possess that emotional power that had driven
Lila  to  do  all  she  could  to  enjoy  that  day  and  that  night.  I  stayed  behind,
waiting.  She,  on  the  other  hand,  seized  things,  truly  wanted  them,  was
passionate  about  them,  played  for  all  or  nothing,  and  wasn’t  afraid  of
contempt,  mockery,  spitting,  beatings.  She  deserved  Nino,  in  other  words,
because she thought that to love him meant to try to have him, not to hope
that he would want her.
I made the dark descent. Now the moon was visible amid scattered pale-
edged clouds; the evening was very fragrant, and you could hear the hypnotic
rhythm of the waves. On the beach I took off my shoes, the sand was cold, a
gray-blue light extended as far as the sea and then spread over its tremulous
expanse. I thought: yes, Lila is right, the beauty of things is a trick, the sky is
the throne of fear; I’m alive, now, here, ten steps from the water, and it is not
at all beautiful, it’s terrifying; along with this beach, the sea, the swarm of
animal  forms,  I  am  part  of  the  universal  terror;  at  this  moment  I’m  the
infinitesimal particle through which the fear of every thing becomes conscious
of itself; I; I who listen to the sound of the sea, who feel the dampness and the
cold  sand;  I  who  imagine  all  Ischia,  the  entwined  bodies  of  Nino  and  Lila,
Stefano sleeping by himself in the new house that is increasingly not so new,
the  furies  who  indulge  the  happiness  of  today  to  feed  the  violence  of
tomorrow. Ah, it’s true, my fear is too great and so I hope that everything will
end soon, that the figures of the nightmares will consume my soul. I hope that
from this darkness packs of mad dogs will emerge, vipers, scorpions, enormous
sea serpents. I hope that while I’m sitting here, on the edge of the sea, assassins
will arrive out of the night and torture my body. Yes, yes, let me be punished
for my insufficiency, let the worst happen, something so devastating that it
will prevent me from facing tonight, tomorrow, the hours and days to come,
reminding  me  with  always  more  crushing  evidence  of  my  unsuitable
constitution.  Thoughts  like  that  I  had,  the  frenzied  thoughts  of  girlish
discouragement. I gave myself up to them, for I don’t know how long. Then
someone said, “Lena,” and touched my shoulder with cold fingers. I started, an
icy grip seized my heart and when I turned suddenly and recognized Donato
Sarratore, the breath burst in my throat like the sip of a magic potion, the kind
that in poems revives strength and the urge to live.
71.
Donato told me that Nella had awakened, found that I wasn’t in the house,
and was worried. Lidia, too, was a little alarmed, so she had asked him to go
and look for me. The only one who had found it normal that I wasn’t in the
house was him. He had reassured the two women, he had said, “Go to sleep,
surely she’s gone to enjoy the moon on the beach.” Yet to please them, out of
prudence, he had come on a reconnaissance. And in fact here I was, sitting and
listening to the sea’s breath, contemplating the divine beauty of the sky.
He spoke like that, more or less. He sat beside me, he murmured that he
knew me as he knew himself. We had the same sensitivity to beautiful things,
the same need to enjoy them, the same need to search for the right words to
say how sweet the night was, how magical the moon, how the sea sparkled,
how two souls were able to meet and recognize each other in the darkness, in
the fragrant air. As he spoke I heard clearly the ridiculousness of his trained
voice, the crudeness of his poeticizing, the sleazy lyricizing behind which he
concealed his eagerness to put his hands on me. But I thought: Maybe we really
are made of the same clay, maybe we really are condemned, blameless, to the
same, identical mediocrity. So I rested my head on his shoulder, I murmured,
“I’m cold.” And he quickly put an arm around my waist, pulled me slowly
closer to him, asked me if it was better like that. I answered, “Yes,” a whisper,
and  Sarratore  lifted  my  chin  with  thumb  and  index  finger,  placed  his  lips
lightly on mine, asked, “How’s that?” Then he pressed me with little kisses that
grew in intensity as he continued to murmur: “And like that, and like that, are
you still cold, is it better like that, is it better?” His mouth was warm and wet, I
welcomed it on mine with increasing gratitude, so that the kiss lasted longer
and longer, his tongue grazed mine, collided with it, sank into my mouth. I felt
better. I realized that I was regaining ground, that the ice was ceding, melting,
that the fear was forgetting itself, that his hands were taking away the cold but
slowly, as if it were made of very thin layers and Sarratore had the ability to
peel them away with cautious precision, one by one, without tearing them, and
that  his  mouth,  too,  had  that  capacity,  and  his  teeth,  his  tongue,  and  he
therefore knew much more about me than Antonio had ever learned, that in
fact he knew what I myself didn’t know. I had a hidden me—I realized—that
fingers, mouth, teeth, tongue were able to discover. Layer after layer, that me
lost every hiding place, was shamelessly exposed, and Sarratore showed that
he knew how to keep it from fleeing, from being ashamed, he knew how to
hold it as if it were the absolute reason for his affectionate motility, for his
sometimes gentle, sometimes fevered pressures. The entire time, I didn’t once
regret having accepted what was happening. I had no second thoughts and I
was proud of myself, I wanted it to be like that, I imposed it on myself. I was
helped, perhaps, by the fact that Sarratore progressively forgot his flowery
language, that, unlike Antonio, he claimed no intervention from me, he never
took my hand to touch him, but confined himself to convincing me that he
liked everything about me, and he applied himself to my body with the care,
the devotion, the pride of the man absorbed in demonstrating how thoroughly
he knows women. I didn’t even hear him say you’re a virgin, probably he was so
sure of my condition that he would have been surprised by the opposite. When
I was overwhelmed by a need for pleasure so demanding and so egocentric that
it canceled out not only the entire world of sensation but also his body, in my
eyes old, and the labels by which he could be classified—father of Nino, railway
worker-poet-journalist, Donato Sarratore—he was aware of it and penetrated me. I
felt that he did it delicately at first, then with a clear and decisive thrust that
caused a rip in my stomach, a stab of pain immediately erased by a rhythmic
oscillation, a sliding, a thrusting, an emptying and filling me with jolts of eager
desire. Until suddenly he withdrew, turned over on his back on the sand and
emitted a sort of strangled roar.
We were silent, the sea returned, the tremendous sky, I felt stunned. That
impelled Sarratore again toward his coarse lyricism, he thought he had to lead
me back to myself with tender words. But I managed to tolerate at most a
couple of phrases. I got up abruptly, shook the sand out of my hair, off my
whole  body,  straightened  myself.  When  he  ventured,  “Where  can  we  meet
tomorrow?” I answered in Italian, in a calm voice, self-assured, that he was
mistaken,  he  must  never  look  for  me  again,  not  at  Cetara  or  in  the
neighborhood. And when he smiled skeptically, I told him that what Antonio
Cappuccio, Melina’s son, could do to him was nothing in comparison to what
Michele Solara, a person I knew well, would do. I need only say a word and
Solara would make things very hard for him. I told him that Michele was eager
to bash his face in, because he had taken money to write about the shop on
Piazza dei Martiri but hadn’t done his job well.
All  the  way  back  I  continued  to  threaten  him,  partly  because  he  had
returned to his sugary-sweet little phrases and I wanted him to understand
clearly my feelings, partly because I was amazed at how the tonality of threat,
which since I was a child I had used only in dialect, came easily to me also in
the Italian language.
72.
I was afraid I would find the two women awake but they were both asleep.
They  weren’t  so  worried  that  they  would  lose  sleep,  they  considered  me
sensible, they trusted me. I slept deeply.
The next day I woke up cheerful and even when Nino, Lila, and what had
happened at the Maronti came back to me, in fragments, I still felt good. I
chatted a long time with Nella, had breakfast with the Sarratores, didn’t mind
the falsely paternal kindness with which Donato treated me. Not for a moment
did I think that sex with that rather conceited, vain, garrulous man had been a
mistake. Yet to see him there at the table, to listen to him, and recognize that it
was he who had deflowered me, disgusted me. I went to the beach with the
whole family, I went swimming with the children, I left behind me a wake of
fondness. I arrived punctually at Forio.
I called Nino, he appeared immediately. I refused to go in, partly because we
had to leave as soon as possible, partly because I did not want to preserve
images of rooms that Nino and Lila had inhabited by themselves for almost two
days. I waited, Lila didn’t come. Suddenly my anxiety returned, I imagined that
Stefano  had  been  able  to  leave  in  the  morning,  that  he  was  disembarking
several hours earlier than expected, and in fact was already on his way to the
house.  I  called  again,  Nino  returned,  he  indicated  that  I  had  to  wait  just
another minute. They came down a quarter of an hour later, they embraced
and kissed for a long time in the entrance. Lila ran toward me, but she stopped
suddenly, as if she had forgotten something, and went back and kissed him
again. I looked away uneasily and the idea that there was something wrong
with me, that I lacked a true capacity for involvement, regained strength. Yet
the two of them again seemed to me so handsome, perfect in every movement,
that to cry, “Lina, hurry up,” was almost to disfigure a fantastical image. She
seemed drawn away by a cruel force, her hand ran slowly from his shoulder,
along the arm, to the fingers, as if in the movement of a dance. Finally she
joined me.
We hardly spoke during the ride in the mini cab.
“Everything all right?”
“Yes. And you?”
“Fine.”
I said nothing about myself, nor did she about herself. But the reasons for
that reticence were very different. I had no intention of putting into words
what had happened to me: it was a bare fact, it had to do with my body, its
physiological reactivity. That for the first time a tiny part of another body had
entered  it  seemed  to  me  irrelevant:  the  nighttime  mass  of  Sarratore
communicated to me nothing except a sensation of alienness, and it was a
relief that it had vanished like a storm that never arrives. It seemed to me
clear, instead, that Lila was silent because she didn’t have words. I felt she was
in a state without thoughts or images, as if in detaching herself from Nino she
had forgotten in him everything of herself, even the capacity to say what had
happened to her, what was happening. This difference between us made me
sad. I tried to search in my experience on the beach for something equivalent
to her sorrowful-happy disorientation. I also realized that at the Maronti, in
Barano, I had left nothing, not even that new self that had been revealed. I had
taken everything with me, and so I didn’t feel the urgency, which I read in
Lila’s eyes, in her half-closed mouth, in her clenched fists, to go back, to be
reunited with the person I had had to leave. And if on the surface my condition
might seem more solid, more compact, here instead, beside Lila, I felt sodden,
earth too soaked with water.
73.
Fortunately I didn’t read her notebooks until later. There were pages and
pages about that day and night with Nino, and what those pages said was
exactly what I hadn’t had and couldn’t say. Lila wrote not even a word about
sexual pleasures, nothing that might be useful in comparing her experience
with mine. She talked instead about love and she did so in a surprising way.
She said that from the day of her marriage until those days on Ischia she had
been, without realizing it, on the point of dying. She described minutely a
sensation of imminent death: lack of energy, lethargy, a strong pressure in the
middle of her head, as if between the brain and the skull there was an air
bubble that was continually expanding, the impression that everything was
moving in a hurry to leave, that the speed of every movement of persons and
things was excessive and hit her, wounded her, caused her physical pain in her
stomach and in her eyes. She said that all this was accompanied by a dulling of
the senses, as if they had been wrapped in cotton wool, and her wounds came
not from the real world but from a hollow space between her body and the
mass of cotton wool in which she felt she was wrapped. She admitted on the
other hand that imminent death seemed to her so assured that it took away
her respect for everything, above all for herself, as if nothing counted anymore
and everything deserved to be ruined. At times she was overwhelmed by a
mania to express herself with no mediation: express herself for the last time,
before becoming like Melina, before crossing the stradone just as a truck was
coming,  and  be  hit,  dragged  away.  Nino  had  changed  that  state,  he  had
snatched her away from death. And he had done it when he had asked her to
dance, at Professor Galiani’s house, and she had refused, frightened by that
offer of salvation. Then, on Ischia, day by day, he had assumed the power of the
savior. He had restored to her the capacity to feel. He had above all brought
back to life her sense of herself. Yes, brought to life. Lines and lines and lines
had at their center the concept of resurrection: an ecstatic rising, the end of
every bond and yet the inexpressible pleasure of a new bond, a revival that was
also a revolt: he and she, she and he together learned life again, banished its
poison, reinvented it as the pure joy of thinking and living.
This, more or less. Her words were very beautiful, mine are only a summary.
If she had confided it to me then, in the taxi, I would have suffered even more,
because  I  would  have  recognized  in  her  fulfillment  the  reverse  of  my
emptiness. I would have understood that she had come to something that I
thought I knew, that I had believed I felt for Nino, and that, instead, I didn’t
know, and perhaps would never know, except in a weak, muted form. I would
have understood that she wasn’t playing a summer game for fun but that a
violent feeling was growing inside her and would overwhelm her. Instead, as
we were returning to Nunzia after our violations, I couldn’t get away from the
usual confused sense of disparity, the impression—recurrent in our story—that
I was losing something and she was gaining. So occasionally I felt the need to
even the score, to tell her how I had lost my virginity between sea and sky, at
night, on the beach at the Maronti. I couldn’t tell her the name of Nino’s father,
I thought, I could invent a sailor, a smuggler of American cigarettes, and tell
her what had happened to me, tell her how good it had been. But I realized that
to tell her about me and my pleasure didn’t matter to me, I would tell my story
only to induce her to tell hers and find out how much pleasure she had had
with Nino and compare it with mine and feel—I hoped—in the lead. Luckily I
sensed that she would never do it and that I would only have stupidly exposed
myself. I remained silent, as she did.
74.
Once  we  were  home  Lila  found  words  again,  along  with  an  overexcited
expansiveness. Nunzia welcomed us, greatly relieved by our return and yet
hostile. She said she hadn’t closed an eye, she had heard inexplicable noises in
the house, had been afraid of ghosts and murderers. Lila embraced her and
Nunzia almost pushed her away.
“Did you have fun?” she asked.
“A lot of fun, I want to change everything.”
“What do you want to change?”
Lila laughed. “I’ll think about it and let you know.”
“Let your husband know first of all,” Nunzia said, in an unexpectedly sharp
tone.
Her daughter looked at her in amazement, a pleased, and perhaps slightly
moved, amazement, as if the suggestion seemed to her right and urgent.
“Yes,” she said, and went to her room, then to the bathroom.
She came out after a while and, still in her slip, motioned me to come to her
room.  I  went  reluctantly.  She  gazed  at  me  with  feverish  eyes,  she  spoke
rapidly, almost breathlessly: “I want to study what he studies.”
“He’s at the university, the subjects are difficult.”
“I want to read the same books as him, I want to understand the things he
thinks, I want to learn not for the university but for him.”
“Lila, don’t act crazy: we said that you would see him this time and that’s all.
What’s wrong with you, calm down, Stefano is about to get here.”
“Do you think, if I work hard, I can understand the things he understands?”
I couldn’t take it anymore. What I already knew and what I nevertheless was
hiding from myself became at that moment perfectly clear: she, too, now saw
in Nino the only person able to save her. She had taken possession of my old
feeling, had made it her own. And, knowing what she was like, I had no doubts:
she would knock down every obstacle and continue to the end. I answered
harshly.
“No. It’s complicated stuff, you’re too behind in everything, you don’t read a
newspaper, you don’t know who’s in the government, you don’t even know
who runs Naples.”
“And do you know those things?”
“No.”
“He thinks you know them, I told you, he thinks a lot of you.”
I felt myself flushing, I muttered, “I’m trying to learn, and when I don’t know
I pretend to know.”
“Even pretending to know, one gradually learns. Can you help me?”
“No, and no, Lila, it’s not something you should do. Leave him alone, because
of you he’s already saying that he wants to stop going to the university.”
“He’ll study, he was born for that. And yet there are a lot of things that even
he doesn’t know. If I study the things he doesn’t know, I’ll tell him when he
needs them and so I’ll be useful to him. I have to change, Lenù, immediately.”
I burst out again: “You’re married, you have to get him out of your head,
you’re not right for what he needs.”
“Who is right?”
I wanted to wound her, I said, “Nadia.”
“He left her for me.”
“So everything’s fine? I don’t want to listen to you anymore, you’re both out
of your minds, do what you like.”
I went to my room, consumed by unhappiness.
75.
Stefano  arrived  at  the  usual  time.  We  all  three  greeted  him  with  false
cheerfulness,  and  he  was  polite  but  a  little  tense,  as  if  behind  his  benign
expression he had a worry. Since his vacation was to begin that day, I was
surprised that he hadn’t brought any luggage. Lila didn’t seem to notice, but
Nunzia did and asked him, “You look preoccupied, Ste’, is something worrying
you? Is your mamma well? And Pinuccia? And how are things with the shoes?
What do the Solaras say, are they pleased?” He said that everything was fine,
and we had dinner, but the conversation was forced. First Lila made an effort
to seem in a good mood, but when Stefano responded with monosyllables and
no sign of affection she became annoyed and was silent. Only Nunzia and I
tried  every  possible  means  to  keep  the  silence  from  becoming  permanent.
When we got to the fruit Stefano, with a half smile, said to his wife:
“You go swimming with Sarratore’s son?”
My breath failed. Lila answered with irritation: “Sometimes. Why?”
“How many times? One, two three, five, how many? Lenù, do you know?”
“Once,” I said, “ he came by two or three days ago and we all went swimming
together.”
Stefano, still with the half smile on his face, turned to his wife.
“And you and the son of Sarratore are so intimate that when you come out
of the water you hold hands?”
Lila stared straight into his face: “Who told you that?”
“Ada.”
“And who told Ada?”
“Gigliola.”
“And Gigliola?”
“Gigliola saw you, bitch. She came here with Michele, they came to visit you.
And it’s not true that you and that piece of shit went swimming with Lenuccia,
you went by yourselves and you were holding hands.”
Lila got up, she said calmly, “I’m going out, I’m going for a walk.”
“You’re not going anywhere: sit down and answer.”
Lila remained standing. She said suddenly, in Italian and with an expression
that looked like weariness but which—I realized—was contempt: “How stupid I
was to marry you, you’re worthless. You know that Michele Solara wants me in
his shop, you know that for that reason Gigliola would kill me if she could, and
what do you do, you believe her? I don’t want to listen to you anymore, you let
yourself be manipulated like a puppet. Lenù, will you come with me?”
She was about to move toward the door and I started to get up, but Stefano
leaped  up  and  grabbed  her  by  the  arm,  said  to  her,  “You’re  not  going
anywhere.  You  will  tell  me  if  it’s  true  or  not  that  you  went  swimming  by
yourself with the son of Sarratore, if it’s true or not that you go around holding
hands.”
Lila tried to free herself, but she couldn’t. She whispered, “Let go of my arm,
you make me sick.”
Nunzia  at  that  point  intervened.  She  reproached  her  daughter,  said  she
could  not  allow  herself  to  say  that  terrible  thing  to  Stefano.  But  right
afterward, with a surprising energy, she nearly shouted at her son-in-law to
stop it, Lila had already answered, it was envy that made Gigliola say those
things, the daughter of the pastry maker was treacherous, she was afraid of
losing her place in Piazza dei Martiri, she wanted to get rid of Pinuccia, too,
and be the sole mistress of the shop, she who knew nothing about shoes, who
didn’t  even  know  how  to  make  pastries,  while  everything—everything,
everything—was due to Lila, including the success of the new grocery store,
and  so  her  daughter  didn’t  deserve  to  be  treated  like  that,  no,  she  didn’t
deserve it.
She was truly enraged: her face was alight, wide-eyed, at a one point she
seemed to be suffocating, as she added point to point without taking a breath.
But Stefano didn’t listen to a word. His mother-in-law was still speaking when
he  yanked  Lila  toward  the  bedroom,  yelling:  “You  will  now  answer  me,
immediately,” and when she insulted him grossly and grabbed the door of a
cupboard to resist, he pulled her with such force that the door opened, the
cupboard tottered dangerously, with a sound of plates and glasses rattling, and
Lila almost flew through the kitchen and hit the wall of the hall that led to
their room. A moment later her husband had grabbed her again and, holding
her by the arm, but as if he were steadying a cup by the handle, pushed her
into the bedroom and closed the door.
I heard the key turn in the lock, that sound terrified me. I had seen with my
own eyes, in those long moments, that Stefano really was inhabited by the
ghost of his father, that the shadow of Don Achille could swell the veins of his
neck and the blue network under the skin of his forehead. But, although I was
frightened, I felt that I couldn’t stay still, sitting at the table, like Nunzia. I
grabbed the doorknob and began to shake it, to pound the wooden door with
my fist, begging, “Stefano, please, it’s not true, leave her alone. Stefano, don’t
hurt her.” But by now he was sealed within his rage, I could hear him yelling
that he wanted the truth, and since Lila didn’t respond—in fact, it was as if she
were  no  longer  in  the  room—he  seemed  to  be  talking  to  himself  and
meanwhile hitting himself, striking himself, breaking things.
“I’m going to call the landlady,” I said to Nunzia, and I ran down the stairs. I
wanted to ask the woman if she had another key or if her grandson was there,
a large man who could have broken down the door. But I knocked in vain, the
woman  wasn’t  there,  or  if  she  was  she  didn’t  open  the  door.  Meanwhile
Stefano’s shouts shattered the walls, spread through the street, through the
reeds, toward the sea, and yet they seemed to find no ears but mine, no one
looked out of the neighboring houses, no one came running. All that came was
Nunzia’s  pleas,  in  a  low  tone,  alternating  with  the  threat  that  if  Stefano
continued to hurt her daughter she would tell Fernando and Rino everything,
and they, as God was her witness, would kill him.
I ran back, I didn’t know what to do. I hurled myself with all the weight of
my  body  against  the  door,  I  cried  that  I  had  called  the  police,  they  were
coming. Then, since Lila still showed no signs of life, I shrieked: “Lila, are you
all right? Please, Lila, tell me you’re all right.” Only then did we hear her voice.
She spoke not to us but to her husband, coldly:
“You want the truth? Yes, the son of Sarratore and I go swimming and we
hold hands. Yes, we go into the deep sea and kiss each other and touch each
other. Yes, I’ve been fucked by him a hundred times and so I discovered that
you’re a shit, that you’re worthless, that you only demand disgusting things
that make me throw up. Is that what you want? Are you happy?”
Silence. After those words Stefano didn’t take a breath, I stopped pounding
on the door, Nunzia stopped crying. Outside noises returned, the cars passing,
some distant voices, the hens beating their wings.
Some minutes passed and it was Stefano who began speaking again, but so
softly that we couldn’t hear what he was saying. I realized, though, that he was
looking for a way to calm down: short, disconnected phrases, show me that
you’re done, be good, stop it. Lila’s confession must have seemed so unbearable
that he had ended by taking it as a lie. He had seen in it something she resorted
to in order to hurt him, an exaggeration equivalent to a solid punch to bring
his feet back to the ground, words that in short meant: if you still don’t realize
what groundless things you’re accusing me of, now I’m going to make it clear
to you, you just listen.
But to me Lila’s words seemed as terrible as Stefano’s blows. I felt that if the
excessive violence he repressed behind his polite manners and his meek face
terrified me, I now couldn’t bear her courage, that audacious impudence that
allowed her to cry out the truth as if it were a lie. Every single word that she
had  addressed  to  Stefano  had  returned  him  to  his  senses,  because  he
considered it a lie, but had pierced me painfully, because I knew the truth.
When the voice of the grocer reached us more clearly, both Nunzia and I felt
that the worst had passed, Don Achille was withdrawing from his son and
returning him to his gentle, pliable side. And Stefano, restored to the part of
himself that had made him a successful shopkeeper, was bewildered, he didn’t
understand what had happened to his voice, his hands, his arms. Even though
the image of Lila and Nino holding hands probably persisted in his mind, what
Lila had evoked for him with that hail of words could not help but have the
flashing features of unreality.
The door didn’t open, the key didn’t turn in the lock until it was day. But
Stefano’s voice became sad, a depressed pleading, and Nunzia and I waited
outside for hours, keeping each other company with despondent, barely heard
remarks. Whispered words inside, whispered words outside. “If I tell Rino,”
Nunzia murmured, “he’ll kill him, surely he’ll kill him.” And I whispered, as if I
believed her: “Please, don’t tell him.” But meanwhile I thought: Rino, and even
Fernando, after the wedding never moved a finger for Lila; not to mention that
ever since she was born they’ve hit her whenever they wanted. And then I said
to myself: men are all made of the same clay, only Nino is different. And I
sighed, while my resentment grew stronger: now it’s absolutely clear that Lila
will have him, even if she’s married, and together they’ll get out of this filth,
while I will be here forever.
76.
At the first light of dawn Stefano came out of his bedroom, Lila didn’t. He
said, “Pack your bags, we’re leaving.”
Nunzia couldn’t contain herself and bitterly pointed out the damage he had
done to the landlady’s things, saying that he would have to compensate her. He
answered—as if many of the words she had shouted at him hours earlier had
stayed in his mind and he felt the need to dot the “i”s—that he always paid and
would continue to pay. “I paid for this house,” he enumerated in a tired voice,
“I paid for your vacation, everything you, your husband, your son have I’ve
given you: so don’t be a pain in the neck, pack the bags and let’s go.”
Nunzia didn’t say another word. A little later Lila came out of the room in a
yellow dress with long sleeves and big dark glasses, like a movie star. She didn’t
say a word to us. She didn’t at the Port, or on the boat, or even when we
reached the neighborhood. She went home with her husband without saying
goodbye.
As for me, I decided that from that moment on I would live for myself only,
and as soon as we returned to Naples that was what I did, I imposed on myself
an attitude of absolute detachment. I didn’t look for Lila, I didn’t look for Nino.
I accepted without argument the scene that my mother made, as she accused
me of having gone to play the lady on Ischia without thinking about how we
needed  money  at  home.  Even  my  father,  although  he  praised  my  healthy
appearance, the golden blond of my hair, did the same: as soon as my mother
attacked me in his presence, he backed her up. “You’re a grownup,” he said,
“you see what you have to do.”
Earning money was, in fact, an urgent necessity. I could have demanded
from Lila what she had promised me in compensation for my coming to Ischia,
but after that decision to cut myself off from her, and especially after the
brutal words that Stefano had addressed to Nunzia (and in some way also to
me), I didn’t do it. For the same reason I absolutely ruled out the idea of her
buying my school books, as she had the year before. When I saw Alfonso I
asked him to tell her that I had already taken care of the books, and closed the
discussion.
But after the August holiday I presented myself again at the bookstore on
Mezzocannone,  and  partly  because  I  had  been  an  efficient  and  disciplined
salesclerk, partly because of my looks, which had been improved by the sun
and  the  sea,  the  owner,  after  some  resistance,  gave  me  back  my  job.  He
insisted, however, that I should not quit when school started but continue to
work, if only in the afternoons, for the entire period of schoolbook sales. I
agreed and spent long hours in the bookstore greeting teachers who came with
bags full of books they had received free from publishing houses, to sell for a
few lire, and students who sold their tattered used books for even less.
I lived through a week of pure anguish when my period didn’t come. Afraid
that Sarratore had made me pregnant, I was in despair; I was polite on the
outside, grim inside. I spent sleepless nights, but didn’t ask advice or comfort
from anyone, I kept it all to myself. Finally, one afternoon in the bookstore I
went to the dirty toilet and found the blood. It was one of the rare moments of
well-being during that time. My period seemed a sort of symbolic cancellation
of Sarratore’s incursion into my body.
In early September it occurred to me that Nino must have returned from
Ischia and I began to fear and hope that he would come by at least to say hello.
But he didn’t show up on Via Mezzocannone or in the neighborhood. As for
Lila, I saw her only a couple of times, on Sunday, when, beside her husband in
the  car,  she  drove  by  on  the  stradone.  Those  few  seconds  were  enough  to
enrage me. What had happened. How she had arranged things for herself. She
continued to have everything, to keep everything: the car, Stefano, the house
with the bathroom and the telephone and the television, the nice clothes, the
prosperity. And who could say what plans she was devising in the secrecy of
her mind. I knew how she was made and I said to myself that she wouldn’t give
up Nino even if Nino gave up her. But I chased away those thoughts and forced
myself to respect the pact I had made with myself: to plan my life without
them and learn not to suffer for it. To that end I concentrated on training
myself to react little or not at all. I learned to reduce my emotions to the
minimum:  if  the  owner  reached  out  his  hands  I  repulsed  him  without
indignation; if the customers were rude I made the best of it; even with my
mother I managed to stay submissive. I said to myself every day: I am what I
am and I have to accept myself; I was born like this, in this city, with this
dialect, without money; I will give what I can give, I will take what I can take, I
will endure what has to be endured.
77.
Then school began again. Only when I entered the classroom on the first of
October did  I realize  that  I was  in  my last  year of  high  school, that  I  was
eighteen years old, that the years of school, in my case already miraculously
long, were about to end. So much the better. Alfonso and I talked a lot about
what we would do after we graduated. He knew as much as I did. We’ll take a
civil-service exam, he said, but in fact we didn’t have clear ideas on what the
exams entailed; we said sit the exam, pass the exam, but the concept was vague:
did you have to do a written exercise, take an oral test? And what did you get
once you’d taken it, a salary?
Alfonso confided that he was thinking of getting married, once he had taken
the exam and gained a post.
“To Marisa?”
“Yes, of course.”
Sometimes  I  asked  him  warily  about  Nino,  but  he  didn’t  like  Nino,  they
didn’t even say hello to each other. He had never understood what I found in
him. He’s ugly, he said, all out of proportion, skin and bone. Marisa, on the
other hand, seemed pretty to him. But he immediately added, careful not to
wound me, “You’re pretty, too.” He liked beauty, and especially appreciated
care for one’s body. He himself was attentive to his appearance, he smelled of
the barber, he bought clothes, he lifted weights every day. He told me that he
had a good time at the shop in Piazza dei Martiri. It wasn’t like the grocery.
There  you  could  be  elegant,  in  fact  you  had  to  be.  There  you  could  speak
Italian, the people were respectable, had gone to school. There, even when you
were on your knees in front of the customers, men and women, trying on the
shoes, you could do it with pleasant manners, like the knight in a courtly love
story. But unfortunately he wouldn’t be able to stay in the shop.
“Why?”
“Well . . . ”
At first he was vague and I didn’t insist. Then he told me that Pinuccia was
staying home now because she didn’t want to get tired, she had a belly like a
torpedo; and anyway it was clear that once she had the baby she wouldn’t have
time to work. This in theory should have cleared a path for him, the Solaras
were pleased with him, maybe he would be able to establish himself there after
he graduated. But it wasn’t possible, and here suddenly the name of Lila came
up. Just hearing it my stomach flared up.
“What does she have to do with it?”
I  knew  she  had  returned  from  the  vacation  like  a  madwoman.  She  still
wasn’t pregnant, the swimming had been of no use, she was behaving oddly.
Once she had broken all the flowerpots on her balcony. She said she was going
to  the  grocery,  instead  she  left  Carmen  alone  and  went  walking  around.
Stefano woke up at night and she wasn’t in bed: she was wandering through
the house, she read and wrote. Then suddenly she calmed down. Or rather she
focused her entire capacity to spoil Stefano’s life on a single objective: for
Gigliola to work in the new grocery, and she in Piazza dei Martiri.
I was amazed.
“It’s Michele who wants her in the shop,” I said, “but she doesn’t want to
go.”
“Once. Now she’s changed her mind, she’s moving heaven and earth to get
herself there. The only obstacle is Stefano, he’s against it. But of course in the
end my brother does what she wants.”
I asked no other questions, I wanted in no way to be reabsorbed into Lila’s
affairs. But for a while I surprised myself by wondering: what could she have in
mind, why all of a sudden does she want to go and work in the city? Then I
forgot about it, taken up by other problems: the bookstore, school, the class
interrogations, the textbooks. Some I bought, most I stole from the bookstore
without too many scruples. I began studying rigorously again, mainly at night.
In the afternoon, in fact, until Christmas vacation, when I quit, I was busy at
the bookstore. And right after that Professor Galiani herself arranged a couple
of private pupils for me, and I worked hard for them. Between school, lessons,
and study, there was no room for anything else.
When at the end of the month I gave my mother the money I earned, she put
it in her pocket without saying anything, but in the morning she got up early
to make breakfast for me, sometimes even a beaten egg, which she devoted
such care to—while I was still in bed half asleep, I heard the clack clack of the
spoon against the cup as she beat in the sugar—that it melted in my mouth like
a  cream,  the  sugar  completely  dissolved.  As  for  the  teachers  at  school,  it
seemed that they couldn’t help considering me a brilliant student, as if the
sluggish operation of the entire dusty scholastic machine had decided it. I had
no trouble defending my position as first in the class and, with Nino gone, I
ranked among the best in the whole school. But I soon realized that although
Professor  Galiani  continued  to  be  very  generous,  she  blamed  me  for  some
offense that kept her from being as friendly as she had been in the past. For
example, when I gave her back her books she was annoyed, because they were
sandy, and took them away without promising to give me others. For example,
she no longer offered me her newspapers, and for a while I forced myself to
buy  Il  Mattino,  then  I  stopped,  it  bored  me,  it  was  a  waste  of  money.  For
example, she never invited me to her house, although I would have liked to see
her son Armando again. Yet she continued to praise me publicly, to give me
high grades, to advise me about important lectures and even films that were
shown in a parish hall in Port’Alba. Until once, near Christmas vacation, she
called as school was letting out and we walked some way together. Bluntly she
asked what I knew about Nino.
“Nothing,” I said.
“Tell me the truth.”
“It’s the truth.”
It slowly emerged that Nino, after the summer, had not been in touch either
with her or with her daughter.
“He  broke  up  with  Nadia  in  a  very  unpleasant  way,”  she  said,  with  the
resentment of a mother. “He sent her a few lines in a letter from Ischia and
caused her a lot of suffering.” Then she contained herself and added, resuming
her role as a professor again: “Never mind, you’re all young, suffering helps
one grow.”
I nodded yes, she asked me: “Did he leave you, too?”
I turned red. “Me?”
“Didn’t you see each other on Ischia?”
“Yes, but there was nothing between us.”
“Really?”
“Absolutely.”
“Nadia is convinced that he left her for you.”
I denied it forcefully, I said I would be happy to see Nadia and tell her that
between me and Nino there had never been anything and never would be. She
was pleased, she assured me that she would report that. I didn’t mention Lila,
naturally, and not only because I had decided to mind my own business but
also because to talk about it would have depressed me. I tried to change the
subject,  but  she  returned  to  Nino.  She  said  that  various  rumors  were
circulating about him. There were some who said that not only had he not
taken his exams in the autumn but he had stopped studying; and there were
some who swore they had seen him one afternoon on Via Arenaccia, alone,
completely drunk, lurching along, and every so often taking a swig from a
bottle. But not everyone, she concluded, found him likable and maybe there
were people who enjoyed spreading nasty rumors about him. If, however, they
were true, what a pity.
“Surely they’re lies,” I said.
“Let’s hope so. But it’s hard to keep up with that boy.”
“Yes.”
“He’s very smart.”
“Yes.”
“If you have a way of finding out what’s happening, let me know.”
We parted. I hurried off to give a Greek lesson to a girl in middle school who
lived in Parco Margherita. But it was difficult. The large, permanently semi-
dark room where I was greeted respectfully held heavy furniture, rugs with
hunting scenes, old photographs of high-ranking soldiers, and various other
signs  of  a  long  history  of  authority  and  ease  that  produced  in  my  pale
fourteen-year-old pupil a dullness of body and intelligence, and in me a feeling
of  impatience.  That  day  I  had  to  struggle  to  supervise  declensions  and
conjugations. The picture of Nino as Professor Galiani had evoked him kept
returning to my mind: worn jacket, tie flying, long legs staggering, the empty
bottle that after the last swallow shattered on the stones of Via Arenaccia.
What  had  happened  between  him  and  Lila,  after  Ischia?  Contrary  to  my
predictions,  she  had  evidently  seen  her  mistake,  it  was  all  over,  she  had
returned to herself. Nino hadn’t: from a studious youth with a well-formulated
response to everything he had become a vagrant, undone by the pain of love
for  the  grocer’s  wife.  I  thought  of  asking  Alfonso  again  if  he  had  news.  I
thought of going to Marisa myself and asking her about her brother. But soon I
forced the idea out of my mind. It will pass, I said to myself. Has he come to see
me? No. Has Lila come to see me? No. Why should I worry about him, or her,
when they don’t care about me? I continued the lesson and went on my way.
78.
After Christmas I found out from Alfonso that Pinuccia had given birth, she
had had a boy, named Fernando. I went to see her, thinking that I would find
her in bed, happy, with the baby at her breast. Instead, she was up, but in
nightgown and slippers, sulking. She rudely sent away her mother, who said to
her, “Get in bed, don’t tire yourself,” and when she led me to the cradle she
said grimly, “Nothing ever works out for me, look how ugly he is, it upsets me
just to look at him, let alone touch him.” And although Maria, standing in the
doorway, murmured, like a soothing formula, “What are you talking about,
Pina, he’s beautiful,” she continued to repeat angrily, “He’s ugly, he’s uglier
than  Rino,  that  whole  family  is  ugly.”  Then  she  drew  in  her  breath  and
exclaimed desperately, with tears in her eyes, “It’s my fault, I made a bad
choice of a husband, but when you’re a girl you don’t think about it, and now
look at what a child I’ve had, he has a pug nose just like Lina.” Then, with no
interruption, she began to insult her sister-in-law grossly.
I learned from her that Lila, the whore, had already in two weeks done and
redone as she liked the shop in Piazza dei Martiri. Gigliola had had to give in,
she had returned to the Solaras’ pastry shop; she herself, Pinuccia, had had to
give in, chained to the child until goodness knows when; they had all had to
give  in,  Stefano  above  all,  as  usual.  And  now,  every  day,  Lila  was  up  to
something new: she went to work dressed up as if she were Mike Bongiorno’s
assistant, and if her husband wouldn’t take her in the car she had no scruples
about getting Michele to drive her; she had spent who knows how much for
two paintings that you couldn’t understand what they were of, and had hung
them in the shop for who knows what purpose; she had bought a lot of books
and, instead of shoes, she put those on the shelf; she had fitted out a sort of
living room, with couches, chairs, ottomans, and a crystal bowl where she kept
chocolates from Gay Odin, available to whoever wanted them, free, as if she
were there not to notice the stink of the customers’ feet but to play the great
lady in her castle.
“And it’s not only that,” she said, “there’s something even worse.”
“What?”
“You know what Marcello Solara did?”
“No.”
“You remember the shoes that Stefano and Rino gave him?”
“The ones made exactly the way Lina designed them?”
“Yes, a wretched shoe, Rino always said that the water got in.”
“Well, what happened?”
Pina overwhelmed me with a laborious, sometimes confused story, involving
money, treacherous plots, deception, debts. Marcello, dissatisfied with the new
models made by Rino and Fernando—and certainly in agreement with Michele
—had had shoes like those manufactured, but not in the Cerullo factory, in
another  factory,  in  Afragola.  Then,  at  Christmas,  he  had  distributed  them
under the Solara name in the stores, including the one on Piazza dei Martiri.
“And he could do that?”
“Of course, they’re his: my brother and my husband, those two shits, gave
them to him, he can do what he likes.”
“So?”
“So,” she said, “now there are Cerullo shoes and Solara shoes circulating in
Naples. And the Solara shoes are selling really well, better than the Cerullos.
And  all  the  profit  is  the  Solaras’.  So  Rino  is  extremely  upset,  because  he
expected some competition, of course, but not from the Solaras themselves, his
partners, and with a shoe he made with his own hands and then stupidly threw
away.”
I  remembered  Marcello  when  Lila  threatened  him  with  the  shoemaker’s
knife. He was slower than Michele, more timid. What need had he to be so
offensive? The Solaras had numerous businesses, some legitimate, others not,
and they were getting bigger every day. They had had powerful friendships
since the days of their grandfather, they did favors and received them. Their
mother  was  a  loan  shark  and  had  a  book  that  struck  fear  into  half  the
neighborhood, maybe now the Cerullos and the Carraccis, too. For Marcello,
then, and for his brother, the shoes and the shop on Piazza dei Martiri were
only one of the many wells into which their family dipped, and surely not
among the most important. So why?
Pinuccia’s story began to disturb me. Behind the appearance of money I felt
something depressing. Marcello’s love for Lila was over, but the wound had
remained and become infected. No longer dependent, he felt free to hurt those
who had humiliated him in the past. “Rino,” Pinuccia in fact said, “went with
Stefano  to  protest,  but  it  was  pointless.”  The  Solaras  had  treated  them
contemptuously,  they  were  people  used  to  doing  what  they  wanted,  her
brother and husband might as well have been talking to themselves. Finally
Marcello had said vaguely that he and his brother were thinking of an entire
Solara line that would repeat, with variations, the features of the shoe that had
been made as a trial. And then he had added, without a clear connection, “Let’s
see how your new products go and if it’s worth the trouble to keep them on the
market.” Understood? Understood. Marcello wanted to eliminate the Cerullo
brand,  replace  it  with  Solara,  and  thus  cause  not  insignificant  economic
damage to Stefano. I have to get out of the neighborhood, out of Naples, I said
to myself, what do I care about their quarrels? But in the meantime I asked:
“And Lina?”
Pinuccia’s eyes blazed.
“She’s the real problem.”
Lina had laughed at that story. When Rino and her husband got angry she
made fun of them: “You gave him those shoes, not me; you did business with
the  Solaras,  not  me.  If  you  two  are  idiots,  what  can  I  do?”  She  wouldn’t
cooperate,  you  couldn’t  tell  where  she  stood,  with  the  family  or  with  the
Solaras.  So  when  Michele  again  insisted  that  he  wanted  her  in  Piazza  dei
Martiri, she had suddenly said yes, and had tormented Stefano to let her go.
“And why in the world did Stefano give in?” I asked.
Pinuccia let out a long sigh of impatience. Stefano had given in because he
hoped  that  Lila,  seeing  that  Michele  valued  her  so  much,  and  seeing  that
Marcello had always had a weakness for her, would manage to settle things.
But Rino didn’t trust his sister, he was frightened, he couldn’t sleep at night. He
liked the old shoe that he and Fernando had thrown away and that Marcello
had had made in its original form; it sold well. What would happen if the
Solaras began to deal with Lila directly and if she, a bitch since the day she was
born, after refusing to design new shoes for the family, went on to design shoes
for them?
“It won’t happen,” I said to Pinuccia.
“Did she tell you?”
“No, I haven’t seen her since the summer.”
“So?”
“I know what she’s like. Lina gets curious about a thing and she’s utterly
caught up in it. But once she’s done it, the desire goes away, she doesn’t care
about it anymore.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
Maria was content with those words of mine, she clung to them to soothe
her daughter.
“You hear?” she said. “Everything is fine, Lenuccia knows what she’s talking
about.”
But in fact I knew nothing, the less pedantic part of me was well aware of
Lila’s unpredictability, so I couldn’t wait to get out of that house. What do I
have  to  do  with  it,  I  thought,  with  these  wretched  stories,  with  the  petty
vendetta of Marcello Solara, with this struggle and worry over money, cars,
houses, furniture and knickknacks and vacations? And how could Lila, after
Ischia, after Nino, go back to jousting with those thugs? I’ll get my diploma, I’ll
take the entrance exams, I’ll win. I’ll get out of this muck, go as far away as
possible. I said, softening toward the baby, whom Maria was now holding in
her arms: “How cute he is.”
79.
But I couldn’t resist. I put it off for a long time and finally I gave in: I asked
Alfonso if one Sunday we could go for a walk, he and Marisa and I. Alfonso was
pleased, we went to a pizzeria on Via Foria. I asked about Lidia, the children,
especially  Ciro,  and  then  I  asked  what  Nino  was  up  to.  She  answered
reluctantly, talking about her brother upset her. She said that he had gone
through a long period of madness, and her father, whom she adored, had had a
difficult time with him; Nino had gone so far as to lay hands on him. What the
cause  of  the  madness  was  they  never  found  out:  he  didn’t  want  to  study
anymore, he wanted to leave Italy. Then suddenly it was over: he returned to
himself and had just begun to take his exams.
“So he’s all right?”
“Who knows.”
“He’s happy?”
“As far as somebody like him is capable of being happy, yes.”
“And all he does is study?”
“You mean does he have a girlfriend?”
“No, of course not, I mean does he go out, does he have fun, does he go
dancing.”
“How should I know, Lenù? He’s always out. Now he’s obsessed with movies,
novels, art, and the rare times he comes by the house he starts arguing with
Papa, just to insult him and quarrel with us.”
I felt relieved that Nino had come to his senses, but I was also bitter. Movies,
novels, art? How quickly people changed, with their interests, their feelings.
Well-made phrases replaced by well-made phrases, time is a flow of words
coherent only in appearance, the one who piles up the most is the one who
wins. I felt stupid, I had neglected the things I liked to conform to what Nino
liked. Yes, yes, resign yourself to what you are, each on his own path. I only
hoped that Marisa would not tell him that she had seen me and that I had
asked about him. Not even to Alfonso, after that evening, did I mention Nino or
Lila.
I withdrew even more into my duties, I multiplied them in order to cram my
days and nights. That year I studied obsessively, punctiliously, and I even took
on  a  new  private  lesson,  for  a  lot  of  money.  I  imposed  on  myself  an  iron
discipline, much harsher than what I had enforced since childhood. A marking
of time, a straight line that went from dawn until late at night. In the past
there had been Lila, a continuous happy detour into surprising lands. Now
everything I was I wanted to get from myself. I was almost nineteen, I would
never again depend on someone, and I would never again miss someone.
The last year of high school slipped by like a single day. I struggled with
astronomical geography, with geometry, with trigonometry. It was a sort of
race to know everything, when in fact I took it for granted that my inadequacy
was constitutional and so couldn’t be eliminated. Yet I liked to do my best. I
didn’t have time to go to the movies? I learned titles and plots. Hadn’t been to
the archeological museum? I ran through it in half a day. Hadn’t been to the
picture gallery of Capodimonte? I made a flying visit, two hours and done. I
had too much to do, in short. What did I care about shoes and the shop on
Piazza dei Martiri? I never went there.
Sometimes I met Pinuccia, disheveled-looking, as she pushed Fernando in
his carriage. I stopped a moment, listened absent-mindedly to her complaints
about Rino, Stefano, Lila, Gigliola, everyone. Sometimes I ran into Carmen, who
was increasingly bitter about how badly things had been going in the new
grocery since Lila left, abandoning her to the oppression of Maria and Pinuccia,
and I let her vent for a few minutes about how she missed Enzo Scanno, how
she counted the days as she waited for him to finish his military service, how
her  brother  Pasquale  slaved,  between  his  construction  work  and  his
Communist activities. Sometimes I ran into Ada, who had begun to hate Lila,
while she was very pleased with Stefano, and spoke of him tenderly, and not
only because he had recently increased her salary but also because he was a
hard worker, available to everyone, and didn’t deserve that wife who treated
him like dirt.
It was she who told me that Antonio had been discharged early because of a
severe nervous breakdown.
“What happened?”
“You know what he’s like, he already had a breakdown with you.”
It was a mean statement that wounded me, I tried not to think about it. One
Sunday in winter I ran into Antonio and scarcely recognized him, he was so
thin. I smiled at him, expecting him to stop, but he seemed not to notice me
and kept going. I called him, he turned, with a disoriented smile.
“Hello, Lenù.”
“Hello, I’m so glad to see you.”
“Me, too.”
“What are you doing?”
“Nothing.”
“You’re not going back to the workshop?”
“There’s no job.”
“You’re good, you’ll find something somewhere else.”
“No, if I don’t get better I can’t work.”
“What’s wrong with you?”
“Fear.”
He said it just like that: fear. In Cordenons, one night, while he was on guard
duty, he had remembered a game that his father played when he was still alive
and he himself was very small: with a pen his father would draw eyes and
mouths on the five fingers of his left hand, and then he would move them and
make them talk as if they were people. It was such a sweet game that, as he
remembered it, tears came to his eyes. But that night, during his shift, he had
had the impression that his father’s hand had entered his and that now he had
real people inside his fingers, tiny but fully formed, who were laughing and
singing. That was the source of the fear. He banged his hand against the sentry
box  until  it  bled,  but  the  fingers  went  on  laughing  and  singing,  without
stopping, not for an instant. He recovered only when his shift was over and he
went to sleep. A little rest and the next morning it was gone. But the terror
that the illness in his hand would return remained. In fact it did return, and,
with increasing frequency, his fingers began to laugh and sing even in the
daytime. Until he had gone mad and they had sent him to the doctor.
“It’s gone now,” he said, “but it could always start again.”
“Tell me how I can help you.”
He  thought  for  a  while,  as  if  he  were  really  evaluating  a  series  of
possibilities. He muttered, “No one can help me.”
I  immediately  understood  that  he  no  longer  felt  anything  for  me,  I  had
definitively gone out of his mind. So after that encounter I got in the habit of
going every Sunday to his windows and calling. We would take a walk around
the courtyard, talking about this and that, and when he said he was tired we
said goodbye. Sometimes Melina came down with him, garishly made up, and
he and his mother and I walked. Sometimes we met Ada and Pasquale and took
a longer walk, but then it was generally the three of us who talked, Antonio
was silent. In other words it became a peaceful routine. I went with him to the
funeral of Nicola Scanno, the fruit-and-vegetable seller, who died suddenly of
pneumonia; Enzo came home on leave but wasn’t in time to see him alive. We
also went together to console Pasquale, Carmen, and their mother, Giuseppina,
when they learned that their father, the former carpenter who had killed Don
Achille, had died in prison from a heart attack. And we were together also
when we learned that Don Carlo Resta, the seller of soap and various household
items, had been beaten to death in his cellar. We talked about it for a long time,
the  whole  neighborhood  talked  about  it,  the  talk  spread  truths  and  cruel
rumors, someone said that the beating wasn’t enough and they had stuck a file
in his nose. Some vagrants were blamed for the crime, people who had stolen
the day’s cash. But Pasquale, later, told us he had heard rumors that in his view
were well founded: Don Carlo was in debt to the mother of the Solaras, because
he had the vice of gambling and went to her so that he could pay his debts.
“So what?” asked Ada, who was always skeptical when her fiancé came up
with reckless hypotheses.
“So  he  wouldn’t  pay  what  he  owed  the  loan  shark  and  they  had  him
murdered.”
“Come on, you always talk such nonsense.”
It’s likely that Pasquale was exaggerating, but, first of all, no one knew who
had killed Don Carlo Resta, and, second, it was, precisely, the Solaras who took
over the shop, along with its stock, for very little money, even though they left
Don Carlo’s wife and oldest son there to manage it.
“Out of generosity,” said Ada.
“Because they’re bastards,” said Pasquale.
I  don’t  remember  if  Antonio  made  comments  on  that  episode.  He  was
crushed  by  his  illness,  which  Pasquale’s  speeches  in  some  way  made  more
acute. It seemed to him that the dysfunction of his body was spreading to the
whole neighborhood and was manifested in the bad things that happened.
The worst thing for us happened on a warm Sunday in the spring, when
Pasquale and Ada and he and I were waiting in the courtyard for Carmela, who
had gone up to get a pullover. Five minutes passed; Carmen looked out the
window, shouted to her brother: “Pasquà, I can’t find mamma. The door of the
bathroom is locked from the inside but she doesn’t answer.”
Pasquale took the stairs two at a time and we followed. We found Carmela
standing  anxiously  in  front  of  the  bathroom  door,  and  Pasquale  knocked,
politely, again and again, but no one answered. Antonio then said to his friend,
indicating the door: don’t worry, I’ll put it back in place, and, grabbing the
handle, he practically tore it off.
The door opened. Giuseppina Peluso had been a radiant woman, energetic,
hardworking, kindly, capable of confronting all adversities. She had continued,
without fail, to occupy herself with her imprisoned husband, whose arrest—I
remembered—she had opposed with all her strength, when he was accused of
killing Don Achille Carracci. She had thoughtfully accepted Stefano’s invitation
to  spend  New  Year’s  Eve  together  four  years  earlier,  pleased  with  that
reconciliation  between  the  families.  And  she  had  been  happy  when  her
daughter found work, thanks to Lila, in the grocery in the new neighborhood.
But now, with her husband dead, evidently she was worn out, she had become
in a short time a tiny woman, skin and bone, without her old vigor. She had
unfastened the lamp in the bathroom, a metal plate hanging on a chain, and
had attached a clothesline to the hook set in the ceiling. Then she had hanged
herself by the neck.
Antonio saw her first and burst into tears. It was easier to calm Giuseppina’s
children, Carmen and Pasquale, than him. He repeated to me, horrified: Did
you see that her feet were bare and that the nails were long and that on one
foot there was fresh red nail polish and not on the other? I hadn’t noticed but
he had. He had returned from military service more convinced than before, in
spite  of  his  nervous  breakdown,  that  his  job  was  to  be  the  man  in  every
situation, the one who hurls himself into danger, fearlessly, and resolves every
problem. But he was fragile. For weeks after that episode, he saw Giuseppina in
every dark corner of the house, and he got worse, so I neglected some of my
obligations  to  help  him  calm  down.  He  was  the  only  person  in  the
neighborhood I saw more or less regularly until I took my graduation exams. I
had just a glimpse of Lila, next to her husband, at Giuseppina’s funeral, while
she hugged Carmen, who was sobbing. She and Stefano had sent a large wreath
on whose violet ribbon the condolences of the Carracci spouses could be read.
80.
It wasn’t because of the exams that I stopped seeing Antonio. The two things
happened to coincide, because just then he came to see me, rather relieved, to
tell me that he had accepted a job from the Solara brothers. I didn’t like it, it
seemed to me another sign of his illness. He hated the Solaras. He had scuffled
with them as a boy to defend his sister. He, Pasquale, and Enzo had beaten up
Marcello and Michele and destroyed their car. But the main thing was that he
had left me because I went to ask Marcello for his help in getting Antonio out
of  military  service.  Why,  then,  had  he  succumbed  like  that?  He  gave  me
confused explanations. He said that in the Army he had learned that if you are
a simple soldier you owe obedience to anyone who wears stripes. He said that
order is better than disorder. He said he had learned how you come up behind
a man and kill him before he has even heard you arrive. I understood that the
illness had something to do with it but that the real problem was poverty. He
had presented himself at the bar to ask for work. And Marcello had treated him
a little roughly but then had offered him a fixed amount each month—he put it
like that—without, however, a precise duty, only to be available.
“Available?”
“Yes.”
“Available for what?”
“I don’t know.”
“Forget it, Antò.”
He  didn’t.  And  because  of  that  job  he  ended  up  quarreling  with  both
Pasquale and Enzo, who had returned from military service more taciturn than
before, more inflexible. Illness or not, neither of them could forgive Antonio
for that decision. Pasquale, although he was engaged to Ada, went so far as to
threaten him, he said that, brother-in-law or not, he didn’t want to see him
anymore.
I quickly got away from these problems and concentrated on my graduation
exam. While I studied day and night, sometimes, overwhelmed by the heat, I
thought  again  about  the  previous  summer,  before  Pinuccia  left,  when  Lila,
Nino, and I were a happy trio, or at least so it seemed to me. But I repressed
every image, and even the faintest echo of a word: I allowed no distractions.
The exam was a crucial moment of my life. In a couple of hours I wrote an
essay on the role of Nature in the poetry of Giacomo Leopardi, putting in, along
with lines I knew by heart, finely written reworkings from the textbook of
Italian literary history; but, most important, I handed in my Latin and Greek
tests when my schoolmates, including Alfonso, had barely started on it. This
attracted the attention of the examiners, in particular of an old, extremely thin
teacher, with a pink suit and freshly coiffed, pale-blue hair, who kept smiling
at  me.  But  the  real  turning  point  took  place  during  the  oral  exams.  I  was
praised by all the professors, but in particular I gained the approval of the
examiner with the blue hair. She had been struck by my essay not only because
of what I said but because of how I said it.
“You  write  very  well,”  she  said,  with  an  accent  I  didn’t  recognize,  but
anyway far from Neapolitan.
“Thank you.”
“Do you really think that nothing is fated to last, not even poetry?”
“That’s what Leopardi thinks.”
“You’re sure?”
“Yes.”
“And what do you think?”
“I think that beauty is a sham.”
“Like the Leopardian garden?”
I didn’t know anything about Leopardian gardens, but I answered, “Yes. Like
the sea on a calm day. Or like a sunset. Or like the sky at night. It’s like face
powder patted on over the horror. If you take it away, we are left alone with
our fear.”
The sentences came easily, I uttered them with an inspired cadence. And,
besides, I wasn’t improvising, it was an adaptation of what I had written in the
essay.
“What faculty do you intend to choose?”
I didn’t know much about faculties, that meaning of the term was barely
familiar to me. I was evasive: “I’ll sit the civil-service exam.”
“You won’t go to the university?”
My cheeks burned, as if I were unable to hide a sin.
“No.”
“You need to work?”
“Yes.”
I was dismissed, I returned to Alfonso and the others. But a little later the
professor came up to me in the hallway, and talked for a long time about a kind
of college in Pisa, where, if you passed an exam like the one I had already done,
you studied free.
“If you come back here in a couple of days, I’ll give you all the necessary
information.”
I  listened,  but  the  way  you  do  when  someone  is  talking  to  you  about
something that will never really concern you. And when, two days later, I went
back to school, only out of fear that the professor would be offended and give
me a low grade, I was struck by the very precise information that she had
transcribed for me on a sheet of foolscap. I never met her again, I don’t even
know her name, and yet I owe her a great deal. Continuing to address me
formally, she unaffectedly gave me a dignified farewell embrace.
The exams were over, I passed with an A average. Alfonso also did well, with
a  B  average.  Before  leaving  forever,  with  no  regrets,  the  run-down  gray
building whose only merit, in my eyes, was that Nino, too, had been there, I
caught sight of Professor Galiani and went to say goodbye. She congratulated
me on my results but without enthusiasm. She didn’t offer me books for the
summer,  she  didn’t  ask  what  I  would  do  now  that  I  had  my  high-school
diploma. Her distant tone upset me, I thought that things between us had been
settled. What was the trouble? Once Nino had left her daughter and had fallen
out  of  touch,  was  I  to  be  associated  with  him  forever,  the  same  clay:
insubstantial, unserious, unreliable? I was used to being liked by everyone, to
wrapping that liking around me like shining armor; I was disappointed, and I
think that her indifference had an important role in the decision I then made.
Without talking about it to anyone (who could I ask advice from, anyway, if not
Professor Galiani?) I applied for admission to the Pisa Normale. I immediately
started doing everything I possibly could to earn money. Since the upper-class
families whose children I had given lessons to all year were happy with me and
my reputation as a good teacher had spread, I was able to fill the August days
with new students who had to retake, in September, their exams in Latin,
Greek, history, philosophy, and even mathematics. At the end of the month I
found myself rich, I had amassed seventy thousand lire. I gave fifty to my
mother, who reacted with a violent gesture, she almost tore the money from
my hand and stuffed it in her bra, as if we were not in the kitchen of our house
but on the street and she was afraid of being robbed. I didn’t tell her that I had
kept twenty thousand lire for myself.
Not until the day before my departure did I tell my family that I was going to
Pisa to take exams. “If they accept me,” I announced, “I’ll go there to study and
I won’t have to spend a lira for anything.” I spoke with great decisiveness, in
Italian, as if it were not a subject that could be reduced to dialect, as if my
father, my mother, my siblings shouldn’t and couldn’t understand what I was
about to do. In fact they confined themselves to listening uneasily, it seemed to
me that in their eyes I was no longer me but a stranger who had come to visit
at an inconvenient time. Finally my father said, “Do what you have to do but be
careful, we can’t help you.” And he went to bed. My little sister asked if she
could  come  with  me.  My  mother,  instead,  said  nothing,  but  before  she
vanished she left five thousand lire on the table for me. I stared at it for a long
time, without touching it. Then, overcoming my scruples about how I wasted
money to satisfy my whims, I thought, it’s my money, and I took it.
For the first time, I left Naples, left Campania. I discovered that I was afraid
of everything: afraid of taking the wrong train, afraid of having to pee and not
knowing where to do it, afraid that it would be night and I wouldn’t be able to
orient myself in an unfamiliar city, afraid of being robbed. I put all my money
in my bra, as my mother did, and spent hours in a state of wary anxiety that
coexisted seamlessly with a growing sense of liberation.
Everything went well. Except the exam, it seemed. The professor with the
blue  hair  hadn’t  told  me  that  it  would  be  much  more  difficult  than  the
graduation exam. The Latin, especially, seemed complex, but really that was
only the beginning: every test was the occasion for an extremely painstaking
investigation of my skills. I held forth, I stammered, I often pretended to have
the answer on the tip of my tongue. The professor of Italian treated me as if
even  the  sound  of  my  voice  irritated  him:  You,  miss,  do  not  make  a  logical
argument when you write but flit from one thing to another; I see, miss, that you launch
recklessly into subjects in which you are completely ignorant of the issues of critical
method. I was depressed, I quickly lost confidence in what I was saying. The
professor  realized  it  and,  looking  at  me  ironically,  asked  me  to  talk  about
something I had read recently. I suppose he meant something by an Italian
writer, but I didn’t understand and clung to the first support that seemed to
me secure, that is to say the conversation we had had the summer before, on
Ischia,  on  the  beach  of  Citara,  about  Beckett  and  about  Dan  Rooney,  who,
although  he  was  blind,  wanted  to  become  deaf  and  mute  as  well.  The
professor’s ironic expression changed slowly to bewilderment. He cut me off
me quickly and delivered me to the history professor. He was just as bad. He
subjected me to an endless and exhausting list of questions formulated with
the utmost precision. I had never felt so ignorant as I did at that moment, not
even in the worst years of school, when I had done so badly. I was able to
answer everything, dates, events, but only in an approximate way. As soon as
he pressed me with even more exacting questions I gave up. Finally he asked
me, disgusted, “Have you ever read something that is not simply the school
textbook?”
I said, “I’ve studied the idea of nationhood.”
“Do you remember the name of the author of the book?”
“Federico Chabod.”
“Let’s hear what you understood.”
He listened to me attentively for several minutes, then abruptly dismissed
me, leaving me with the certainty that I had said a lot of nonsense.
I cried and cried, as if I had carelessly lost somewhere the most promising
part of myself. Then I said that despair was stupid, I had always known that I
wasn’t really smart. Lila, yes, she was smart, Nino, yes, he was smart. I was only
presumptuous and had been justly punished.
Instead I found out that I had passed the exam. I would have a place of my
own, a bed that I didn’t have to make at night and unmake in the morning, a
desk and all the books I needed. I, Elena Greco, the daughter of the porter, at
nineteen years old was about to pull myself out of the neighborhood, I was
about to leave Naples. By myself.
81.
A series of whirlwind days began. A few things to wear, a very few books. My
mother’s sullen words: “If you earn money, send it to me by mail; now who’s
going to help your brothers with their homework? They’ll do badly at school
because of you. But go, leave, who cares: I’ve always known that you thought
you  were  better  than  me  and  everybody  else.”  And  then  my  father’s
hypochondriac words: “I have a pain here, who knows what it is, come to your
papa, Lenù, I don’t know if you’ll find me alive when you get back.” And then
my brothers’ and sister’s insistent words: “If we come to see you can we sleep
with you, can we eat with you?” And Pasquale, who said to me, “Be careful
where all this studying leads, Lenù. Remember who you are and which side
you’re on.” And Carmen, who couldn’t get over the death of her mother, and
was fragile, started crying as she said goodbye. And Alfonso, who was stunned
and murmured, “I knew you’d keep studying.” And Antonio, who instead of
listening to what I was saying about where I was going, and what I was going to
do, kept repeating, “I’m really feeling good now, Lenù, it’s all gone, it was going
into the Army that made me ill.” And then Enzo, who confined himself to
taking my hand and squeezing it so hard that it hurt for days. And finally Ada,
who said only, “Did you tell Lina, did you tell her?” and she gave a little laugh,
and insisted, “Tell her, she’ll die of envy.”
I imagined that Lila had already heard from Alfonso, from Carmen, from her
husband, whom Ada had certainly told, that I was going to Pisa. If she didn’t
come  to  congratulate  me,  I  thought,  it’s  likely  that  the  news  really  has
disturbed her. On the other hand, if she didn’t know, to go deliberately to tell
her, when for more than a year we had scarcely said hello, seemed to me out of
place. I didn’t want to flaunt the good fortune that she hadn’t had. So I set
aside the question and devoted myself to the last preparations. I wrote to Nella
to tell her what had happened and ask for the address of Maestra Oliviero, so
that  I  could  give  her  the  news.  I  visited  a  cousin  of  my  father,  who  had
promised me an old suitcase. I made the rounds of some of the houses where I
had taught and where I had to collect my final payment.
It seemed to me an occasion to give a kind of farewell to Naples. I crossed
Via Garibaldi, went along the Tribunali, at Piazza Dante took a bus. I went up to
the Vomero, first to Via Scarlatti, then to the Santarella. Afterward I descended
in the funicular to Piazza Amedeo. I was greeted with regret and, in some
cases, affection by the mothers of my students. Along with the money they
gave me coffee and almost always a small gift. When my rounds were over, I
realized that I was a short distance from Piazza dei Martiri.
I turned onto Via Filangieri, uncertain what to do. I recalled the opening of
the shoe store, Lila all dressed up like a rich lady, how she was gripped by the
anxiety of not having truly changed, of not having the same refinement as the
girls  of  that  neighborhood.  I,  on  the  other  hand,  I  thought,  really  have
changed. I’m still wearing the same shabby clothes, but I’ve got my high-school
diploma and I’m about to go and study in Pisa. I’ve changed not in appearance
but  deep  inside.  The  appearance  will  come  soon  and  it  won’t  be  just
appearance.
I felt pleased with that thought, that observation. I stood in front of an
optician’s window, I studied the frames. Yes, I’ll have to change my glasses, the
ones I have overwhelm my face, I need lighter frames—I picked out a pair with
large, round thin rims. Put up my hair. Learn to use makeup. I left the window
and arrived at Piazza dei Martiri.
Many shops at that hour had their shutters lowered halfway; the Solaras’
was  three-quarters  down.  I  looked  around.  What  did  I  know  of  Lila’s  new
habits? Nothing. When she worked in the new grocery she didn’t go home for
lunch, even though the house was nearby. She stayed in the shop and ate
something with Carmen or talked to me when I came by after school. Now that
she worked in Piazza dei Martiri, it was even more unlikely that she would go
home  for  lunch:  it  would  be  pointless,  besides  the  fact  that  there  wasn’t
enough time. Maybe she was in a café, maybe walking along the sea with the
assistant she surely had. Or maybe she was inside resting. I knocked on the
shutter with my open hand. No answer. I knocked again. Nothing. I called, I
heard steps inside, Lila’s voice asked, “Who is it?”
“Elena.”
“Lenù,” I heard her exclaim.
She pulled up the shutter, she appeared before me. It was a long time since
I’d seen her, even from a distance, and she seemed changed. She wore a white
blouse and a tight blue skirt, her hair and makeup were done with the usual
care. But her face was as if broadened and flattened, her entire body seemed to
me broader and flatter. She pulled me inside, lowered the shutter. The place,
gaudily illuminated, had changed, it really did seem not like a shoe store but
like a living room. She said with a tone of such genuineness that I believed her:
“What a wonderful thing has happened to you, Lenù, and how happy I am that
you came to say goodbye.” She knew about Pisa, of course. She embraced me
warmly, she kissed me on both cheeks, her eyes filled with tears, she repeated,
“I’m really happy.” Then she called, turning to the door of the bathroom:
“Come, Nino, you can come out, it’s Lenuccia.”
My breath failed. The door opened and Nino appeared, in his usual pose,
head lowered, hands in pockets. But his face was furrowed by tension. “Hello,”
he murmured. I didn’t know what to say and offered him my hand. He shook it
without energy. Lila meanwhile went on to tell me many important things in a
brief series of sentences: they had been secretly seeing each other for almost a
year; she had decided for my good not to involve me further in a deception
that, if discovered, would cause trouble for me as well; she was two months
pregnant, she was about to confess everything to Stefano, she wanted to leave
him.
82.
Lila spoke in a tone I knew well, of determination, with which she strove to
eliminate emotion, and she confined herself to rapidly and almost disdainfully
summarizing events and actions, as if she were afraid that allowing herself
merely a tremor in her voice or lower lip would cause everything to lose its
outlines and overflow, inundating her. Nino sat on the couch looking down,
making at most a nod of assent. They held hands.
She said that their meetings there in the shop, amid all the anxieties, had
ended the moment she had the urine analysis and discovered the pregnancy.
Now she and Nino needed their own house, their own life. She wanted to share
with  him  friendships,  books,  lectures,  movies,  theater,  music.  “I  can’t  bear
living  apart  anymore,”  she  said.  She  had  hidden  some  money  and  was
negotiating for a small apartment in Campi Flegrei, twenty thousand lire a
month. They would hide there, waiting for the baby to be born.
How? Without a job? With Nino who had to study? I couldn’t control myself,
I said:
“What need is there to leave Stefano? You’re good at telling lies, you’ve told
him so many, you can perfectly well continue.”
She looked at me with narrow eyes. She had clearly perceived the sarcasm,
the  bitterness,  even  the  contempt  that  those  words  contained  behind  the
appearance of friendly advice. She also noticed that Nino had abruptly raised
his head, that his mouth was half open as if he wanted to say something, but he
contained  himself  in  order  to  avoid  an  argument.  She  replied,  “Lying  was
useful in order not to be killed. But now I would prefer to be killed rather than
continue like this.”
When I said goodbye, wishing them well, I hoped for my sake that I wouldn’t
see them again.
83.
The  years  at  the  Normale  were  important,  but  not  for  the  story  of  our
friendship. I arrived at the university very timid and awkward. I immediately
realized I spoke a bookish Italian that at times was almost absurd, especially
when, right in the middle of a much too carefully composed sentence, I needed
a word and transformed a dialect word into Italian to fill the gap: I began to
struggle to correct myself. I knew almost nothing about etiquette, I spoke in a
loud voice, I chewed noisily; I became aware of other people’s embarrassment
and tried to restrain myself. In my anxiety to appear friendly I interrupted
conversations,  gave  opinions  on  things  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  me,
assumed  manners  that  were  too  familiar:  so  I  endeavored  to  be  polite  but
distant. Once a girl from Rome, answering a question of mine I don’t remember
what about, parodied my inflections and everyone laughed. I felt wounded, but
I laughed, too, and gaily emphasized the dialectal accent as if I were the one
making fun of myself.
In the first weeks I fought the desire to go home by burrowing inside my
usual meek diffidence. But from within that I began to distinguish myself and
gradually became liked. Students male and female, janitors, professors liked
me, and though it might have appeared effortless, in fact I worked hard. I
learned  to  subdue  my  voice  and  gestures.  I  assimilated  rules  of  behavior,
written and unwritten. I kept my Neapolitan accent as much under control as
possible. I managed to demonstrate that I was smart and deserving of respect
by  never  appearing  arrogant,  by  being  ironic  about  my  ignorance,  by
pretending to be surprised at my good results. Above all I avoided making
enemies. When one of the girls appeared hostile, I would focus my attention on
her, I was friendly yet restrained, obliging but tactful, and my attitude didn’t
change even when she softened and was the one who sought me out. I did the
same with the professors. Naturally with them I behaved more circumspectly,
but my goal was the same: to be appreciated, to gain approval and affection. I
approached the most aloof, the most severe, with serene smiles and an air of
devotion.
I took the exams as scheduled, studying with my usual fierce self-discipline. I
was terrified by the idea of failing, of losing what immediately seemed to me,
in spite of the difficulties, paradise on earth: a space of my own, a bed of my
own, a desk, a chair, books and more books, a city a world away from the
neighborhood and Naples, around me only people who studied and who tended
to  discuss  what  they  studied.  I  applied  myself  with  such  diligence  that  no
professor ever gave me less than an A, and within a year I became one of the
most promising students, whose polite greetings could be met with kindness.
There were only two difficult moments, both in the first few months. The
girl from Rome who had made fun of my accent assailed me one morning,
yelling at me in front of other girls that money had disappeared from her
purse, and I must give it back immediately or she would report me to the dean.
I realized that I couldn’t respond with an accommodating smile. I slapped her
violently and heaped insults on her in dialect. They were all frightened. I was
classified as a person who always made the best of things, and my reaction
disoriented them. The girl from Rome was speechless, she stopped up her nose,
which was bleeding, a friend took her to the bathroom. A few hours later they
both  came  to  see  me  and  the  one  who  had  accused  me  of  being  a  thief
apologized—she had found her money. I hugged her, said that her apologies
seemed genuine, and I really thought so. The way I had grown up, I would
never have apologized, even if I had made a mistake.
The other serious difficulty had to do with the opening party, which was to
be held before Christmas vacation. It was a sort of dance for the first-year
students  that  everyone  essentially  had  to  attend.  The  girls  talked  about
nothing else: the boys, who lived in Piazza dei Cavalieri, would come, it was a
great moment of intimacy between the university’s male and female divisions.
I had nothing to wear. It was cold that autumn; it snowed a lot, and the snow
enchanted me. But then I discovered how troublesome the ice in the streets
could be, hands that, without gloves, turned numb, feet with chilblains. My
wardrobe consisted of two winter dresses made by my mother a couple of
years earlier, a worn coat inherited from an aunt, a big blue scarf that I had
made myself, a single pair of shoes, with a half heel, that had been resoled
many times. I had enough problems with my clothes, I didn’t know how to deal
with that party. Ask my classmates? Most of them were having dresses made
just for the occasion, and it was likely that they had something among their
everyday clothes that would have been fine for me. But after my experience
with  Lila  I  couldn’t  bear  the  idea  of  trying  on  someone  else’s  clothes  and
discovering that they didn’t fit. Pretend to be sick? I was tempted by that
solution but it depressed me: to be healthy, and desperate to be a Natasha at
the ball with Prince Andrei or Kuryagin, and instead to be sitting alone, staring
at the ceiling, while listening to the echo of the music, the sound of voices, the
laughter. In the end I made a choice that was probably humiliating but that I
was sure I wouldn’t regret: I washed my hair, put it up, put on some lipstick,
and wore one of my two dresses, the one whose only merit was that it was dark
blue.
I went to the party, and at first I felt uncomfortable. But my outfit had the
advantage  of  not  arousing  envy;  rather,  it  produced  a  sense  of  guilt  that
encouraged camaraderie. In fact many sympathetic girls kept me company and
the boys often asked me to dance. I forgot how I was dressed and even the state
of my shoes. Besides, that night I met Franco Mari, a rather ugly but very
amusing boy with a quick intelligence, insolent and profligate. He was a year
older  than  me,  and  from  a  wealthy  family  in  Reggio  Emilia,  a  militant
Communist  but  critical  of  the  Party’s  social-democratic  leanings.  I  happily
spent a lot of my little free time with him. He gave me everything: clothes,
shoes, a new coat, glasses that didn’t obscure my eyes and my whole face,
books about politics, because that was the subject dearest to him. I learned
from him terrible things about Stalinism and he urged me to read Trotsky; as a
result I developed an anti-Stalinist sensibility and the conviction that in the
U.S.S.R. there was neither socialism nor even Communism: the revolution had
been truncated and needed to be started up again.
He took me on my first trip abroad. We went to Paris, to a conference of
young Communists from all over Europe. I hardly saw Paris: we spent all our
time  in  smoky  places.  I  was  left  with  an  impression  of  streets  much  more
colorful than those of Naples and Pisa, irritation at the sound of the police
sirens, and amazement at the widespread presence of blacks on the streets and
in the meeting rooms; Franco gave a long speech, in French, that was much
applauded. When I told Pasquale about my political experience, he wouldn’t
believe that I—really, you, he said—had done a thing like that. Then he was
silent, embarrassed, when I showed off my reading, declaring that I was now a
Trotskyite.
From  Franco  I  also  got  many  habits  that  were  later  reinforced  by  the
instructions  and  conversations  of  some  of  the  professors:  to  use  the  word
“study” even if I was reading a book of science fiction; to compile very detailed
note  cards  on  every  text  I  studied;  to  get  excited  whenever  I  came  upon
passages in which the effects of social inequality were well described. He was
very attached to what he called my reeducation and I willingly let myself be
reeducated. But to my great regret I couldn’t fall in love. I loved him, I loved
his restless body, but I never felt that he was indispensable. The little that I felt
was gone in a short time, when he lost his place at the Normale: he failed an
exam and had to leave. For several months we wrote to each other. He tried to
reenter  the  Normale;  he  said  that  he  was  doing  it  only  to  be  near  me.  I
encouraged him to take the exam, he failed. We wrote occasionally, and then
for a long time I had no news of him.
84.
This is more or less what happened to me between the end of 1963 and the
end of 1965. How easy it is to tell the story of myself without Lila: time quiets
down and the important facts slide along the thread of the years like suitcases
on a conveyor belt at an airport; you pick them up, put them on the page, and
it’s done.
It’s more complicated to recount what happened to her in those years. The
belt  slows  down,  accelerates,  swerves  abruptly,  goes  off  the  tracks.  The
suitcases fall off, fly open, their contents scatter here and there. Her things end
up  among  mine:  to  accommodate  them,  I  am  compelled  to  return  to  the
narrative concerning me (and that had come to me unobstructed), and expand
phrases  that  now  sound  too  concise.  For  example,  if  Lila  had  gone  to  the
Normale in my place would she ever have decided simply to make the best of
things? And the time I slapped the girl from Rome, how much did her behavior
influence me? How did she manage—even at a distance—to sweep away my
artificial meekness, how much of the requisite determination did she give me,
how much did she dictate even the insults? And the audacity, when, amid a
thousand doubts and fears, I brought Franco to my room—where did that come
from if not from her example? And the sense of unhappiness, when I realized
that I didn’t love him, when I observed the coldness of my feelings, what was
its origin if not, by comparison, the capacity to love that she had demonstrated
and was demonstrating?
Yes, it’s Lila who makes writing difficult. My life forces me to imagine what
hers would have been if what happened to me had happened to her, what use
she would have made of my luck. And her life continuously appears in mine, in
the  words  that  I’ve  uttered,  in  which  there’s  often  an  echo  of  hers,  in  a
particular gesture that is an adaptation of a gesture of hers, in my less which is
such because of her more, in my more which is the yielding to the force of her
less. Not to mention what she never said but let me guess, what I didn’t know
and read later in her notebooks. Thus the story of the facts has to reckon with
filters,  deferments,  partial  truths,  half  lies:  from  it  comes  an  arduous
measurement  of  time  passed  that  is  based  completely  on  the  unreliable
measuring device of words.
I have to admit, for example, that everything about Lila’s sufferings escaped
me. Because she had taken Nino, because with her secret arts she had become
pregnant by him and not by Stefano, because for love she was on the point of
carrying out an act inconceivable in the environment we had grown up in—
abandoning her husband, throwing away the comfort so recently acquired,
running the risk of being murdered along with her lover and the child she
carried  in  her  womb—I  considered  her  happy,  with  that  tempestuous
happiness of novels, films, and comic strips, the only kind that at that time
truly interested me, that is to say not conjugal happiness but the happiness of
passion, a furious confusion of evil and good that had befallen her and not me.
I was mistaken. Now I return to the moment when Stefano took us away
from Ischia, and I know for certain that the moment the boat pulled out from
the shore and Lila realized that she would no longer find Nino waiting for her
on the beach in the morning, would no longer debate, talk, whisper with him,
that they would no longer swim together, no longer kiss and caress and love
each other, she was violently scarred by suffering. Within a few days the entire
life of Signora Carracci—balances and imbalances, strategies, battles, wars and
alliances, troubles with suppliers and customers, the art of cheating on the
weight, the devotion to piling up money in the drawer of the cash register—
dematerialized,  lost  truth.  Only  Nino  was  concrete  and  true,  and  she  who
wanted him, who desired him day and night, who clung to her husband in the
darkness of the bedroom to forget the other even for a few moments. A terrible
fraction of time. It was in those very moments that she felt most strongly the
need to have him, and so clearly, with such a precision of detail, that she
pushed Stefano away like a stranger and took refuge in a corner of the bed,
weeping and shouting insults, or she ran to the bathroom and locked herself
in.
85.
At first she thought of sneaking out at night and returning to Forio, but she
realized that her husband would find her right away. Then she thought of
asking Alfonso if Marisa knew when her brother would return from Ischia, but
she was afraid that her brother-in-law would tell Stefano she had asked that
question and she let it go. She found in the telephone book the number of the
Sarratore  house  and  she  telephoned.  Donato  answered.  She  said  she  was  a
friend of Nino, he cut her off in an angry tone, hung up. Out of desperation she
returned to the idea of taking the boat, and had nearly made up her mind,
when, one afternoon in early September, Nino appeared in the doorway of the
crowded grocery, unshaved and totally drunk.
Lila  restrained  Carmen,  who  had  jumped  up  to  chase  out  the  disorderly
youth, in her eyes a crazy stranger. “I’ll take care of it,” she said, and dragged
him away. Precise gestures, cold voice, the certainty that Carmen Peluso hadn’t
recognized the son of Sarratore, now very different from the child who had
gone to elementary school with them.
She acted fast. She appeared normal, like a woman who knows how to solve
every  problem.  In  truth,  she  no  longer  knew  where  she  was.  The  shelves
stacked with goods had faded, the street had lost every definition, the pale
façades  of  the  new  apartment  buildings  had  dissolved;  but  most  of  all  she
didn’t feel the risk she was running. Nino Nino Nino: she felt only joy and
desire.  He  was  before  her  again,  finally,  and  his  every  feature  loudly
proclaimed that he had suffered and was suffering, had looked for her and
wanted her, so much that he tried to grab her, kiss her on the street.
She took him to her house, it seemed to her the safest place. Passersby? She
saw none. Neighbors? She saw none. They began to make love as soon as she
closed the door of the apartment behind her. She felt no scruple. She felt only
the need to grab Nino, immediately, hold him, keep him. That need didn’t
diminish even when they calmed down. The neighborhood, the neighbors, the
grocery, the streets, the sounds of the trains, Stefano, Carmen waiting, perhaps
anxious, slowly returned, but only as objects to be arranged hastily, so that
they  would  not  get  in  the  way,  but  with  enough  care  so  that,  piled  up
haphazardly, they would not suddenly fall.
Nino reproached her for having left without warning him, he held her tight,
he still wanted her. He demanded that they go away immediately, together, but
then he didn’t know where. She answered yes yes yes, and shared his madness
in everything, although, unlike him, she felt the time, the real seconds and
minutes that, slipping by, magnified the danger of being surprised. So, lying
with him on the floor, she looked at the lamp hanging from the ceiling just
above them, like a threat, and if before she had been preoccupied only with
having Nino right away, no matter what might come crashing down, now she
thought about how to keep him close to her without the lamp detaching itself
from the ceiling, without the floor cleaving in two, with him forever on one
side, her on the other.
“Go.”
“No.”
“You’re mad.”
“Yes.”
“Please, I’m begging you, go.”
She  convinced  him.  She  waited  for  Carmen  to  say  something,  for  the
neighbors to gossip maliciously, for Stefano to return from the other grocery
and beat her. It didn’t happen, and she was relieved. She increased Carmen’s
pay, she became affectionate toward her husband, she invented excuses that
allowed her to meet Nino secretly.
86.
At first the larger problem was not the possibility of gossip that would ruin
everything but him, the beloved. Nothing mattered to him except to clutch
her, kiss her, bite her, penetrate her. It seemed that he wanted, that he needed,
to live his whole life with his mouth on her mouth, inside her body. And he
couldn’t tolerate the separations, he was frightened by them, he feared that
she would vanish again. So he stupefied himself with alcohol, he didn’t study,
he smoked constantly. It was as if for him there was nothing in the world but
the two of them, and if he resorted to words he did it only to cry to her his
jealousy, to tell her obsessively how intolerable he found it that she continued
to live with her husband.
“I’ve left everything,” he murmured wearily, “and you don’t want to leave
anything.”
“What are you thinking of doing?” she then asked him.
Nino was silent, disoriented by the question, or he became enraged, as if the
situation offended him. He said desperately, “You don’t want me anymore.”
But  Lila  wanted  him,  wanted  him  again  and  again,  but  she  also  wanted
something else, and right away. She wanted him to return to studying, she
wanted him to continue to stimulate her mind the way he had on Ischia. The
phenomenal child of elementary school, the girl who had charmed Maestra
Oliviero, who had written The Blue Fairy, had reappeared and was stirring with
new energy. Nino had found her under the pile of dirt where she had ended up
and pulled her out. That girl was now urging him to be once more the studious
youth he had been and allow her to develop the power to sweep away Signora
Carracci. Which she gradually did.
I don’t know what happened: Nino must have perceived that in order not to
lose her he had to be something more than a furious lover. Or maybe not,
maybe he simply felt that passion was emptying him. The fact is that he began
studying again. And Lila at first was content: he slowly recovered, became as
she had known him on Ischia, which made him even more essential to her. She
had again not only Nino but also something of his words, his ideas. He read
Smith unhappily, she, too, tried to do it; he read Joyce even more unhappily,
she tried, too. She bought the books that he mentioned to her the rare times
they managed to meet. She wanted to talk about them, there was never a
chance.
Carmen, who was increasingly bewildered, didn’t understand what could be
so urgent when Lila, with one excuse or another, was absent for several hours.
She observed her frowning, so immersed in reading a book or writing in her
notebooks that she seemed not to see or hear anything, as she left the burden
of the customers to Carmen, even during the grocery’s busiest hours. Carmen
had to say, “Lina, please, can you help me?” Only then did she look up, run a
fingertip over her lips, say yes.
As for Stefano, he fluctuated between anxiety and acquiescence. While he
quarreled with his brother-in-law, his father-in-law, the Solaras, and was upset
because, in spite of all that swimming in the sea, children didn’t come, here
was his wife being sarcastic about the troubles with the shoes, and wrapped up
in  novels,  journals,  newspapers  until  late  into  the  night:  this  mania  had
returned, as if real life no longer interested her. He observed her, he didn’t
understand or didn’t have the time or the wish to understand. After Ischia, a
part of him, the most aggressive, in the face of those alternating attitudes of
rejection and peaceful estrangement, was inciting him to a new clash and a
definitive  explanation.  But  another  part,  more  prudent,  perhaps  afraid,
restrained the first, pretended not to notice, thought: better like this than
when she’s being a pain in the ass. And Lila, who had grasped that thought,
tried to make it last in his mind. At night, when they both returned home from
work, she was not hostile toward her husband. But after dinner and some talk
she  withdrew  cautiously  into  reading,  a  mental  space  inaccessible  to  him,
inhabited only by her and Nino.
What did he become for her in that period? A sexual yearning that kept her
in a state of permanent erotic fantasy; a blazing up of her mind that wanted to
be at the same level as his; above all an abstract plan for a secret couple, hiding
in a kind of refuge that was to be part bungalow for two hearts, part workshop
of ideas on the complexity of the world, he present and active, she a shadow
glued to his footsteps, cautious prompter, fervent collaborator. The rare times
that they were able to be together not for a few minutes but for an hour, that
hour  was  transformed  into  an  inexhaustible  flow  of  sexual  and  verbal
exchanges, a complete well-being that, at the moment of separation, made the
return to the grocery and to Stefano’s bed unbearable.
“I can’t take it anymore.”
“Me neither.”
“What can we do?”
“I don’t know.”
“I want to be with you always.”
Or at least, she added, for a few hours every day.
But  how  to  carve  out  time,  safe  and  regular?  Seeing  Nino  at  home  was
extremely dangerous, seeing him in the street even more so. Not to mention
that at times Stefano telephoned the grocery and she wasn’t there, and to
come up with a plausible explanation was difficult. So, caught between Nino’s
impatience  and  her  husband’s  complaints,  instead  of  regaining  a  sense  of
reality and telling herself clearly that she was in a situation with no way out,
Lila began to act as if the real world were a backdrop or a chessboard, and you
had only to shift a painted screen, move a pawn or two, and you would see that
the game, the only thing that really counted, her game, the game of the two of
them, could continue to be played. As for the future, the future became the day
after  and  then  the  next  and  then  the  one  after  that.  Or  sudden  images  of
massacre and blood, which were very frequent in her notebooks. She never
wrote  I  will  die  murdered,  but  she  noted  local  crime  news,  sometimes  she
reinvented  it.  In  these  stories  of  murdered  women  she  emphasized  the
murderer’s  rage,  the  blood  everywhere.  And  she  added  details  that  the
newspapers didn’t report: eyes dug out of their sockets, injuries caused by a
knife to the throat or internal organs, the blade that pierced a breast, nipples
cut off, the stomach ripped open from the bellybutton down, the blade that
scraped across the genitals. It was as if she wanted to take the power away
even from the realistic possibility of violent death by reducing it to words, to a
form that could be controlled.
87.
It was in that perspective of a game with possibly mortal outcomes that Lila
inserted herself into the conflict between her brother, her husband, and the
Solara brothers. She used Michele’s conviction that she was the most suitable
person to manage the commercial situation in Piazza dei Martiri. She abruptly
stopped saying no and after quarrelsome negotiations as a result of which she
obtained absolute autonomy and a substantial weekly salary, as if she were not
Signora Carracci, she agreed to go and work in the shoe store. She didn’t care
about her brother, who felt threatened by the new Solara brand and saw her
move as a betrayal; or about her husband, who at first was furious, threatened
her,  then  drove  her  to  complicated  mediations  in  his  name  with  the  two
brothers concerning debts contracted with their mother, sums of money to
receive  and  to  give.  She  also  ignored  the  sugary  words  of  Michele,  who
constantly  hovered  around  her,  to  supervise,  without  appearing  to,  the
reorganization of the shop, and at the same time pressed to get new shoe
models directly from her, passing over Rino and Stefano.
Lila had perceived for a long time that her brother and her father would be
swept away, that the Solaras would appropriate everything, that Stefano would
stay afloat only if he became more dependent on their dealings. But if before
that  prospect  made  her  indignant,  now,  she  wrote  in  her  notebooks,  the
situation left her completely indifferent. Of course, she was sad about Rino, she
was sorry that his role as a boss was already declining, especially since he was
married and had a child. But in her eyes the bonds of the past now had little
substance, her capacity for affection had taken a single path, every thought,
every feeling had Nino at its center. If before her motivation was to make her
brother rich, now it was only to please Nino.
The first time she went to the shop in Piazza dei Martiri to see what to do
with it she was struck by the fact that on the wall where the panel with her
wedding photograph had been you could still see the yellowish-black stain
from the flames that had destroyed it. That trace upset her. I don’t like any
part of what happened to me and what I did before Nino, she thought. And it
suddenly occurred to her that there, in that space at the center of the city, and
for reasons that were obscure to her, every crucial development in her war had
occurred. There, the evening of the fight with the youths of Via dei Mille, she
had  decided  conclusively  that  she  had  to  escape  poverty.  There  she  had
repented of that decision and had defaced her wedding photograph and had
insisted that the defacement, as defacement, should be featured in the shop as
a decoration. There she had discovered the signs that her pregnancy was about
to  end.  There,  now,  the  shoe  enterprise  was  failing,  swallowed  up  by  the
Solaras. And there, too, her marriage would end, she would tear off Stefano and
his name, along with all that derived from it. What a mess, she said to Michele
Solara, pointing out the burn marks. Then she went out to the sidewalk to look
at the stone lions in the center of the square, and was afraid of them.
She  had  it  all  painted.  In  the  bathroom,  which  had  no  windows,  she
reopened a walled-up door that had once led to an interior courtyard and
installed a half window of frosted glass that could let in some light. She bought
two paintings that she had seen in a gallery in Chiatamone and had liked. She
hired a salesgirl, not from the neighborhood but a girl from Materdei who had
studied to be a secretary. She arranged that the afternoon closing hours, from
one until four, should be for her and for the assistant a period of absolute
repose,  for  which  the  girl  was  always  grateful.  She  held  off  Michele,  who,
although he supported every innovation sight unseen, nonetheless insisted on
knowing the details of what she was doing, what she spent.
In the neighborhood, meanwhile, the decision to go to work in Piazza dei
Martiri isolated her more than she already had been. A girl who had made a
good marriage and had gained, out of nowhere, a comfortable life, a pretty girl
who could be mistress of her own house, a house owned by her husband—why
did she jump out of bed in the morning and remain far from home all day, in
the city, employed by others, complicating Stefano’s life, and her mother-in-
law’s, who because of her had to go back to work in the new grocery? Pinuccia
and Gigliola especially, each in her way, threw on Lila all the mud they were
capable of, and this was predictable. Less predictable was Carmen, who adored
Lila for all she had done for her, but who, as soon as Lila left the grocery,
withdrew her affection as if she were pulling back a hand grazed by an animal’s
claws. She didn’t like the abrupt change from friend-colleague to servant in the
clutches of Stefano’s mother. She felt betrayed, abandoned to fate, and couldn’t
control her resentment. She even began to argue with her fiancé, Enzo, who
didn’t approve of her bitterness, he shook his head and, in his laconic way,
rather than defend Lila, assigned her, in a few words, a sort of inviolability, the
privilege of having reasons that were always just and indisputable.
“Everything I do is no good, everything she does is good,” Carmen hissed
bitterly.
“Who said so?”
“You: Lina thinks, Lina does, Lina knows. And I? I whom she went off and left
there? But naturally she was right to leave and I am wrong to complain. Is it
true? Is that what you think?”
“No.”
But in spite of that pure and simple monosyllable, Carmen wasn’t convinced,
she suffered. She sensed that Enzo was tired of everything, even of her, and
this enraged her even more: ever since his father died, since he had returned
from the Army, he did what he had to do, led his usual life, but meanwhile he
was studying at night—he had started during his military service—to get some
sort of diploma. Now he was shut up in his head, roaring like a beast—roaring
inside,  outside  silent—and  Carmen  couldn’t  bear  it,  she  especially  couldn’t
stand that he became a little animated only when he talked about that bitch,
and she shouted at him, and began to cry, screaming:
“Lina makes me sick, because she doesn’t give a damn about anyone, but you
like that, I know. While if I acted the way she acts, you’d smash my face.”
Ada, on the other hand, had long since aligned herself with her employer,
Stefano, against the wife who harassed him, and when Lila went to the center
of town to be the luxury saleswoman she simply became more treacherous.
She said bad things about her to anyone, openly, straight out, but she was
angry mainly with Antonio and Pasquale. “She has always taken you in, you
men,” she said, “because she knows how to get you, she’s a whore.” She said it
just like that, irately, as if Antonio and Pasquale were the representatives of all
the insufficiency of the male sex. She insulted her brother, who didn’t side
with her, she screamed at him: “You’re silent because you take money from the
Solaras, too, you’re both employees of the company, and I know you’re ordered
around by a woman, you help her put the shop in order, she says move this and
move that and you obey.” And she was even worse with her fiancé, Pasquale,
with whom she was increasingly at odds, constantly criticizing him, saying,
“You’re dirty, you stink.” He apologized, he had just finished work, but Ada
continued to attack him, every chance she got, so that Pasquale, to live in
peace,  gave  in  on  the  subject  of  Lila;  the  alternative  was  to  break  the
engagement, although—it should be said—that was not the only reason. He had
often been angry with both his fiancée and his sister for having forgotten all
the benefits they had gained from Lila’s rise, but when, one morning, he saw
our friend in the Giulietta with Michele Solara, who was driving her to Piazza
dei Martiri, dressed like a high-class prostitute, all made up, he admitted that
he  couldn’t  understand  how,  without  a  real  economic  need,  she  could  sell
herself to a man like that.
Lila, as usual, paid no attention to the hostility that was growing around her;
she devoted herself to the new job. And soon sales rose sharply. The shop
became a place where people went to buy, but also to chat with that lively,
very  pretty  young  woman,  whose  conversation  sparkled,  who  kept  books
among  the  shoes,  who  read  those  books,  who  offered  you  little  chocolates
along with the intelligent talk, and who, moreover, never seemed to want to
sell Cerullo shoes or Solara shoes to the wife or daughters of the lawyer or the
engineer, to the journalist for Mattino, to the young or old dandy who was
wasting  time  and  money  at  the  Club;  rather,  she  wanted  them  to  make
themselves comfortable on the couch and the ottomans and chat about this
and that.
The only obstacle, Michele. He was often in the way during work hours and
once he said in that ironic, insinuating tone he had, “You have the wrong
husband, Lina. I was right: look how well you move among the people who can
be useful to us. You and I together in a few years would take over Naples and
do what we like with it.”
At that point he tried to kiss her.
She pushed him away, he wasn’t offended. He said, in amusement, “That’s all
right, I know how to wait.”
“Wait where you like, but not here,” she said, “because if you wait here I’ll
go back to the grocery tomorrow.”
Michele’s visits diminished while Nino’s secret visits increased. For months
he and Lila had, finally, in the shop on Piazza dei Martiri, a life of their own,
which lasted for three hours a day, except Sundays and holidays, and those
were unbearable. He came in through the door of the bathroom at one o’clock,
as soon as the assistant pulled the gate three-quarters of the way down and
went off, and he left by that same door at four, exactly, before the assistant
returned. On the rare occasions that there was some problem—a couple of
times  Michele  arrived  with  Gigliola  and  there  were  particularly  tense
situations when Stefano showed up—Nino shut himself in the bathroom and
sneaked out by the door that opened to the courtyard.
I think for Lila that was a tumultuous trial period for a happy existence. On
the one hand she enthusiastically played the part of the young woman who
gave the shoe store an eccentric touch, on the other she read for Nino, studied
for Nino, reflected for Nino. And even the people of some prominence with
whom she became acquainted in the shop seemed to her mainly connections to
be used to help him.
During that period, Nino published an article in Il Mattino on Naples that
gave him modest fame in university circles. I didn’t know about it, and luckily:
if they had included me in their story as they had on Ischia I would have been
so  severely  scarred  that  I  would  never  have  managed  to  recover.  And  it
wouldn’t have taken me long to figure out that many of the lines in that article
—not the most erudite, but those few intuitions that did not require great
expertise, only an inspired moment of contact between things that were very
distant from one another—were Lila’s, and that the tonality of the writing in
particular belonged to her. Nino had never been able to write in such a fashion
nor was he able to later. Only she and I could write like that.
88.
Then she discovered that she was pregnant and decided to put an end to the
deception of Piazza dei Martiri. One Sunday in the late autumn of 1963 she
refused to go to lunch at her mother-in-law’s, as they usually did, and devoted
herself to cooking with great care. While Stefano went to get pastries at the
Solaras’, bringing some to his mother and sister to be forgiven for his Sunday
desertion, Lila put in the suitcase bought for her honeymoon some underwear,
a few dresses, a pair of winter shoes, and hid it behind the door of the living
room. Then she washed all the pots that she had gotten dirty, set the table in
the kitchen, took a carving knife out of a drawer and put it on the sink, covered
by a towel. Finally, waiting for her husband to return, she opened the window
to get rid of the cooking smells, and stood there looking at the trains and the
shining tracks. The cold dissipated the warmth of the apartment, but it didn’t
bother her, it gave her energy.
Stefano returned, they sat down at the table. Irritated because he had been
deprived of his mother’s good cooking, he didn’t say a single word in praise of
the lunch but was harsher than usual toward his brother-in-law, Rino, and
more affectionate than usual toward his nephew. He kept calling him my sister’s
son, as if Rino’s contribution had been of little account. When they got to the
pastries,  he  ate  three,  she  none.  Stefano  carefully  wiped  the  cream  off  his
mouth and said, “Let’s go to bed for a while.”
Lila answered, “Starting tomorrow I’m not going to the shop anymore.”
Stefano immediately understood that the afternoon was taking a bad turn.
“Why?”
“Because I don’t feel like it.”
“Did you fight with Michele and Marcello?”
“No.”
“Lina, don’t talk nonsense, you know very well that your brother and I are
just one step from a violent clash with them, don’t complicate things.”
“I’m not complicating anything. But I’m not going there anymore.”
Stefano  was  silent  and  Lila  saw  that  he  was  worried,  that  he  wanted  to
escape without examining the matter. Her husband was afraid she was about to
reveal to him some insult on the part of the Solaras, an unforgivable offense to
which, once he knew about it, he would have to react, leading to an irrevocable
rupture. Which he couldn’t afford.
“All right,” he said, when he made up his mind to speak, “don’t go, go back
to the grocery.”
She answered, “I don’t feel like the grocery, either.”
Stefano looked at her in bewilderment. “You want to stay home? Good. You
wanted to work, I never asked you. Is that true or not?”
“It’s true.”
“Then stay home, I’d be glad to have you at home.”
“I don’t want to stay home, either.”
He was close to losing his calm, the only way he knew to expel anxiety.
“If you don’t want to stay home, either, am I allowed to know what the fuck
you want?”
Lila answered, “I want to go.”
“Go where?”
“I don’t want to stay with you anymore, I want to leave you.”
The only thing Stefano could do was start laughing. Those words seemed to
him so enormous that for a few minutes he seemed relieved. He pinched her
cheek, he said with his usual half smile that they were husband and wife and
that husband and wife don’t leave each other, he promised that the following
Sunday he would take her to the Amalfi Coast, so they could relax a little. But
she answered calmly that there was no reason to stay together, that she had
been wrong from the start, that even when they were engaged she had liked
him only a little, that she now knew clearly that she had never loved him and
that to be supported by him, to help him make money, to sleep with him were
things that she could no longer tolerate. It was at the end of that speech that
she received a blow that knocked her off her chair. She got up while Stefano
moved to grab her, she ran to the sink, seized the knife that she had put under
the dishtowel. She turned to him just when he was about to hit her again.
“Do it and I’ll kill you the way they killed your father,” she said.
Stefano  stopped,  stunned  by  that  reference  to  the  fate  of  his  father.  He
muttered things like “All right, kill me, do what you want.” And he made a
gesture  of  boredom  and  yawned,  an  uncontrollable  yawn,  his  mouth  wide
open, that left his eyes bright and shining. He turned his back on her and, still
muttering resentfully—“Go on, go, I’ve given you everything, I’ve yielded in
every way, and you repay me like this, me, who raised you out of poverty, who
made your brother rich, your father, and your whole shitty family”—went to
the table and ate another pastry.
Then he left the kitchen, retreated to the bedroom, and from there he cried
suddenly, “You can’t even imagine how much I love you.”
Lila placed the knife on the sink, she thought: he doesn’t believe that I’m
leaving him; he wouldn’t even believe that I have someone else, he can’t. Yet
she got up her courage and went to the bedroom to confess to him about Nino,
to tell him she was pregnant. But her husband was sleeping, he had fallen
asleep as if wrapped in a magic cape. So she put on her coat, took the suitcase,
and left the apartment.
89.
Stefano slept all day. When he woke up and realized that his wife wasn’t
there he pretended not to notice. He had behaved like that since he was a boy,
when his father terrorized him by his mere presence and he, in reaction, had
trained himself to that half smile, to slow, tranquil gestures, to a controlled
distance from the world around him, to keep at bay both fear and the desire to
tear open his chest with his bare hands and, pulling it apart, rip out the heart.
In  the  evening  he  went  out  and  did  something  rash:  he  went  to  Ada’s
windows,  and  though  he  knew  she  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  movies  or
somewhere with Pasquale, he called her, kept calling her. Ada looked out, both
happy and alarmed. She had stayed home because Melina was raving more
than usual and Antonio, ever since he had gone to work for the Solaras, was
always  out,  he  didn’t  have  a  schedule.  Her  fiancé  was  there  keeping  her
company. Stefano went up just the same, and, without ever mentioning Lila,
spent the evening at the Cappuccio house talking politics with Pasquale and
about  matters  connected  to  the  grocery  with  Ada.  When  he  got  home  he
pretended that Lila had gone to her parents’ and before he went to bed he
shaved carefully. He slept heavily all night.
The  trouble  began  the  next  day.  The  assistant  at  Piazza  dei  Martiri  told
Michele that Lila hadn’t shown up. Michele telephoned Stefano and Stefano
told him that his wife was sick. The illness lasted for days, so Nunzia stopped
by to see if her daughter needed her. No one opened the door, she went back in
the evening, Stefano had just returned from work and was sitting in front of
the television, which was at high volume. He swore, he went to open the door,
invited her in. As soon as Nunzia said, “How is Lina?” he answered that she had
left him, then he burst into tears.
Both  families  hurried  over:  Stefano’s  mother,  Alfonso,  Pinuccia  with  the
baby, Rino, Fernando. For one reason or another they were all frightened, but
only Maria and Nunzia were openly worried about Lila’s fate and wondered
where she had gone. The others quarreled for reasons that had little to do with
her.  Rino  and  Fernando,  who  were  angry  at  Stefano  because  he  had  done
nothing  to  prevent  the  closing  of  the  shoe  factory,  accused  him  of  having
never understood Lila and said he had been very wrong to send her to the
Solaras’ shop. Pinuccia got angry and yelled at her husband and her father-in-
law  that  Lila  had  always  been  a  hothead,  that  she  wasn’t  Stefano’s  victim,
Stefano was hers. When Alfonso ventured that they should turn to the police,
ask at the hospitals, feelings flared up even more, they all criticized him as if
he had insulted them: Rino in particular cried that the last thing they needed
was to become the laughingstock of the neighborhood. It was Maria who said
softly,  “Maybe  she’s  gone  to  stay  with  Lenù  for  a  while.”  That  hypothesis
caught on. They continued to quarrel, but they all pretended, except Alfonso,
to believe that Lila, because of Stefano, and the Solaras, had decided to go to
Pisa. “Yes,” Nunzia said, calming down, “she always does that, as soon as she
has a problem she goes to Lenù.” At that point, they all started to get angry
about  that  reckless  journey,  all  by  herself,  on  the  train,  far  away,  without
telling anyone. And yet that Lila was with me seemed so plausible and at the
same time so reassuring that it immediately became a fact. Only Alfonso said,
“I’ll leave tomorrow and go see,” but he was immediately checked by Pinuccia,
“Where  are  you  going  when  you  have  to  work,”  and  by  Fernando,  who
muttered, “Leave her alone, let her calm down.”
The next day that was the version that Stefano gave to anyone who asked
about Lila: “She went to Pisa to see Lenù, she wants to rest.” But that afternoon
Nunzia was gripped again by anxiety, she went to see Alfonso and asked if he
had my address. He didn’t have it, no one did, only my mother. So Nunzia sent
Alfonso to her, but my mother, out of her natural hostility toward everyone or
to safeguard my studies from distraction, gave him an incomplete version (it’s
likely that she herself had it that way: writing was hard for my mother, and we
both knew that she would never use that address). In any case Nunzia and
Alfonso together wrote me a letter in which they asked in a very roundabout
way if Lila was with me. They addressed it to the University of Pisa, nothing
else, only my name and surname, and its arrival was much delayed. I read it, I
became even angrier with Lila and Nino, I didn’t answer.
Meanwhile,  the  day  after  Lila’s  so-called  departure,  Ada,  in  addition  to
working in the old grocery store, in addition to attending to her entire family
and the needs of her fiancé, also began to tidy up Stefano’s house and to cook
for him, which put Pasquale in a bad mood. They quarreled, he said to her,
“You’re not paid to be a servant,” and she answered, “Better to be a servant
than waste time arguing with you.” On the other hand, to keep the Solaras
happy Alfonso was quickly sent to Piazza dei Martiri, where he felt at his ease:
he left early in the morning dressed as if he were going to a wedding and
returned at night very pleased: he liked spending the day in the center. As for
Michele,  who  with  the  disappearance  of  Signora  Carracci  had  become
intractable, he called Antonio and said to him: “Find her for me.”
Antonio  muttered,  “Naples  is  big,  Michè,  and  so  is  Pisa,  and  even  Italy.
Where do I begin?”
Michele answered, “With Sarratore’s oldest son.” Then he gave him the look
he reserved for people he considered worth less than nothing and said, “Don’t
you dare tell anyone about this search or I’ll put you in the insane asylum at
Aversa and you’ll never get out. Everything you know, everything you see, you
will tell me alone. Is that clear?”
Antonio nodded yes.
90.
That people, even more than things, lost their boundaries and overflowed
into shapelessness is what most frightened Lila in the course of her life. The
loss of those boundaries in her brother, whom she loved more than anyone in
her family, had frightened her, and the disintegration of Stefano in the passage
from fiancé to husband terrified her. I learned only from her notebooks how
much her wedding night had scarred her and how she feared the potential
distortion of her husband’s body, his disfigurement by the internal impulses of
desire and rage or, on the contrary, of subtle plans, base acts. Especially at
night  she  was  afraid  of  waking  up  and  finding  him  formless  in  the  bed,
transformed into excrescences that burst out because of too much fluid, the
flesh melted and dripping, and with it everything around, the furniture, the
entire apartment and she herself, his wife, broken, sucked into that stream
polluted by living matter.
When she closed the door behind her and, as if she were inside a white cloud
of steam that made her invisible, took the metro to Campi Flegrei, Lila had the
impression  that  she  had  left  a  soft  space,  inhabited  by  forms  without
definition,  and  was  finally  heading  toward  a  structure  that  was  capable  of
containing her fully, all of her, without her cracking or the figures around her
cracking. She reached her destination along desolate streets. She dragged the
suitcase to the third floor of a working-class apartment building, and into a
shoddy,  dark  two-room  apartment  furnished  with  old,  cheap  furniture,  a
bathroom where there was only a toilet and sink. She had done it all herself,
Nino had to prepare for his exams and he was also working on a new article for
Il Mattino and on transforming the other into an essay that had been rejected
by Cronache Meridionali, but that a journal called Nord e Sud said it was eager to
publish. She had seen the apartment, had rented it, had given three payments
in advance. Now, as soon as she entered, she felt enormously cheerful. She
discovered with surprise the pleasure of having abandoned those she thought
would have to be part of her forever. Pleasure, yes, she wrote just that. She
didn’t feel in the least the loss of the new neighborhood’s comforts, she didn’t
smell the odor of mold, didn’t see the stain of dampness in a corner of the
bedroom,  didn’t  notice  the  gray  light  that  struggled  to  enter  through  the
window, wasn’t depressed by a place that immediately foretold a return to the
poverty of her childhood. Instead, she felt as if she had magically disappeared
from a place where she suffered, and had reappeared in a place that promised
happiness. She was again fascinated, I think, by erasing herself: enough with
everything she had been; enough with the stradone, shoes, groceries, husband,
Solaras, Piazza dei Martiri; enough even with me, bride, wife, gone elsewhere,
lost. All that remained of her self was the lover of Nino, who arrived that
evening.
He was visibly overcome by emotion. He embraced her, kissed her, looked
around  disoriented.  He  barred  doors  and  windows  as  if  he  feared  sudden
incursions. They made love, in a bed for the first time after the night in Forio.
Then he got up, he started studying, he complained often about the weak light.
She also got out of bed and helped him review. They went to sleep at three in
the morning, after revising together the new article for Il Mattino, and they
slept in an embrace. Lila felt safe, although it was raining outside, the windows
shook, the house was alien to her. How new Nino’s body was, long, thin, so
different from Stefano’s. How exciting his smell was. It seemed to her that she
had come from a world of shadows and had arrived in a place where finally life
was real. In the morning, as soon as she put her feet on the floor, she had to
run to the toilet to throw up. She closed the door so that Nino wouldn’t hear.
91.
They  lived  together  for  twenty-three  days.  The  relief  at  having  left
everything increased from moment to moment. She didn’t miss any of the
comforts she had enjoyed after her marriage, and separation from her parents,
her younger siblings, Rino, her nephew didn’t sadden her. She never worried
that the money would run out. The only thing that seemed to matter was that
she woke up with Nino and fell asleep with him, that she was beside him when
he studied or wrote, that they had lively discussions in which the jumble of
thoughts in her head poured out. At night they went to a movie together, or
chose a book presentation, or a political debate, and often they stayed out late,
returning home on foot, clinging to one another to protect themselves from
the cold or the rain, squabbling, joking.
Once  they  went  to  hear  a  writer  named  Pasolini,  who  also  made  films.
Everything that had to do with him caused an uproar and Nino didn’t like him,
he twisted his mouth, said, “He’s a fairy, all he does is make a lot of noise,” so
he had resisted, he would have preferred to stay home and study. But Lila was
curious and she dragged him there. The talk was held in the same club where I
had gone once, in obedience to Professor Galiani. Lila was enthusiastic when
she came out, she pushed Nino toward the writer, she wanted to talk to him.
But Nino was nervous and did his best to get her away, especially when he
realized that on the sidewalk across the street there were youths shouting
insults.  “Let’s  go,”  he  said,  worried,  “I  don’t  like  him  and  I  don’t  like  the
fascists, either.” But Lila had grown up amid violence, she had no intention of
sneaking off; he tried to pull her toward an alley and she wriggled free, she
laughed, she responded to the insults with insults. She gave in abruptly when,
just as a real fight was starting, she recognized Antonio. His eyes and his teeth
shone as if they were made of metal, but unlike the others he wasn’t shouting.
He seemed too busy hitting people to be aware of her, but the thing ruined the
evening for her anyway. On the way home she felt some tension with Nino:
they didn’t agree about what Pasolini had said, they seemed to have gone to
different places to hear different people. But it wasn’t only that. That night he
regretted the long exciting period of the furtive meetings in the shop on Piazza
dei Martiri and at the same time perceived that something about Lila disturbed
him. She noticed his distraction, his irritation, and to avoid further tension did
not  say  that  among  the  attackers  she  had  seen  a  friend  of  hers  from  the
neighborhood, Melina’s son.
From then on Nino seemed less and less inclined to take her out. First he
said that he had to study, and it was true, then he let slip that on various public
occasions she had been excessive.
“In what sense?”
“You exaggerate.”
“Meaning?”
He made a resentful list: “You make comments out loud; if someone tells you
to  be  quiet  you  start  arguing;  you  bother  the  speakers  with  your  own
monologues. It’s not done.”
Lila had known that it wasn’t done, but she had believed that now, with him,
everything was possible, bridging gaps with a leap, speaking face to face with
people who counted. Hadn’t she been able to talk to influential types, in the
Solaras’  shop?  Hadn’t  it  been  thanks  to  one  of  the  customers  that  he  had
published his first article in Il Mattino? And so? “You’re too timid,” she said.
“You still don’t understand that you’re better than they are and you’ll do much
more important things.” Then she kissed him.
But the following evenings Nino, with one excuse or another, began to go
out alone. And if he stayed home instead and studied, he complained of how
much noise there was in the building. Or he grumbled because he had to go and
ask his father for money, and Donato would torment him with questions like:
Where are you sleeping, what are you doing, where are you living, are you
studying? Or, in the face of Lila’s ability to make connections between very
different things, instead of being excited as usual he shook his head, became
irritable.
After a while he was in such a bad mood, and so behind with his exams, that
in order to keep studying he stopped going to bed with her. Lila said, “It’s late,
let’s go to sleep,” he answered with a distracted, “You go, I’ll come later.” He
looked at the outline of her body under the covers and desired its warmth but
was also afraid of it. I haven’t yet graduated, he thought, I don’t have a job; if I
don’t want to throw my life away I have to apply myself; instead I’m here with
this person who is married, who is pregnant, who vomits every morning, who
prevents  me  from  being  disciplined.  When  he  found  out  that  Il  Mattino
wouldn’t publish the article he was really upset. Lila consoled him, told him to
send it to other newspapers. But then she added, “Tomorrow I’ll call.”
She wanted to call the editor she had met in the Solaras’ shop and find out
what was wrong. He stammered, “You won’t telephone anyone.”
“Why?”
“Because that shit was never interested in me but in you.”
“It’s not true.”
“It’s very true, I’m not a fool, you just make problems for me.”
“What do you mean?”
“I shouldn’t have listened to you.”
“What did I do?”
“You confused my ideas. Because you’re like a drop of water, ting ting ting.
Until it’s done your way, you won’t stop.”
“You thought of the article and wrote it.”
“Exactly. And so why did you make me redo it four times?”
“You wanted to rewrite it.”
“Lina, let’s be very clear: choose something of your own that you like, go
back  to  selling  shoes,  go  back  to  selling  salami,  but  don’t  desire  to  be
something you’re not by ruining me.”
They had been living together for twenty-three days, a cloud in which the
gods  had  hidden  them  so  that  they  could  enjoy  each  other  without  being
disturbed. Those words wounded her deeply, she said, “Get out.”
He quickly pulled his coat on over his sweater and slammed the door behind
him.
Lila sat on the bed and thought: he’ll be back in ten minutes, he left his
books, his notes, his shaving cream and razor. Then she burst into tears: how
could I have thought of living with him, of being able to help him? It’s my fault:
to free my head, I even made him write something wrong.
She went to bed and waited. She waited all night, but Nino didn’t come back,
not the morning after or the one after that.
92.
What I am now recounting I learned from various people at various times. I
begin with Nino, who left the house in Campi Flegrei and took refuge with his
parents. His mother treated him better, much better, than the prodigal son.
With his father, on the other hand, he was quarreling within an hour, the
insults flew. Donato yelled at him in dialect that he could either leave home or
stay there, but the thing he absolutely could not do was to disappear for a
month without telling anyone and then return only to swipe some money as if
he had earned it himself.
Nino retreated to his room and had many arguments with himself. Although
he already wanted to run back to Lina, ask her pardon, cry to her that he loved
her, he assessed the situation and became convinced that he had fallen into a
trap, not his fault, not Lina’s fault, but the fault of desire. Now, for example, he
thought,  I  can’t  wait  to  go  back  to  her,  cover  her  with  kisses,  assume  my
responsibilities; but a part of me knows perfectly well that what I did today on
a wave of disappointment is true and right: Lina isn’t right for me, Lina is
pregnant, what’s in her womb scares me; so I must absolutely not return, I
have to go to Bruno, borrow some money, leave Naples as Elena did, study
somewhere else.
He deliberated all night and all the next day, now pierced by a need for Lila,
now clinging to chilling thoughts that evoked her crude ingenuousness, her
too  intelligent  ignorance,  the  force  with  which  she  drew  him  into  her
thoughts, which seemed like insights but were, instead, muddled.
In the evening he telephoned Bruno and, in a frenzy, left to go see him. He
ran through the rain to the bus stop, barely caught the right bus before it left.
But suddenly he changed his mind and got off at Piazza Garibaldi. He took the
metro to Campi Flegrei, he couldn’t wait to embrace Lila, take her standing up,
right away, as soon as he was in the house, against the entrance wall. That now
seemed the most important thing, then he would think what to do.
It was dark, he walked with long strides in the rain. He didn’t even notice the
dark silhouette coming toward him. He was shoved so violently that he fell
down.  A  long  series  of  blows  began,  punching  and  kicking,  kicking  and
punching. The person who hit him kept repeating, but not angrily:
“Leave her, don’t see her and don’t touch her again. Repeat: I will leave her.
Repeat: I won’t see her and I won’t touch her again. You piece of shit: you like
it, eh, taking other men’s wives. Repeat: I was wrong, I’ll leave her.”
Nino repeated obediently, but his attacker didn’t stop. He fainted more out
of fear than out of pain.
93.
It was Antonio who beat up Nino, but he reported almost none of this to his
boss. When Michele asked if he had found Sarratore’s son he answered yes.
When he asked with evident anxiety if that track had led to Lila he said no.
When he asked him if he had had information about Lila he said he couldn’t
find her and the only thing he could absolutely rule out was that Sarratore’s
son had anything to do with Signora Carracci.
He was lying, of course. He had found Nino and Lila fairly soon, by chance,
the  night  he  had  had  the  job  of  brawling  with  the  Communists.  He  had
smashed a few faces and then had left the fight to follow the two who had fled.
He had discovered where they lived, he had understood that they were living
together, and in the following days he had studied everything they did, how
they lived. Seeing them he had felt both admiration and envy. Admiration for
Lila. How is it possible, he had said to himself, that she abandoned her house, a
beautiful house, and left her husband, the groceries, the cars, the shoes, the
Solaras, for a student without a cent who keeps her in a place almost worse
than the old neighborhood? What is it with that girl: courage, or madness?
Then he concentrated on his envy of Nino. What hurt him most was that Lila
and  I  both  liked  the  skinny,  ugly  bastard.  What  was  it  about  the  son  of
Sarratore, what was his advantage? He had thought about it night and day. He
was gripped by a kind of morbid obsession that affected his nerves, especially
in  his  hands,  so  that  he  was  constantly  interlacing  them,  pressing  them
together as if he were praying. Finally he had decided that he had to free Lila,
even if at that moment, perhaps, she had no desire to be freed. But—he had
said to himself—it takes time for people to understand what’s good and what’s
bad, and helping them means doing for them what in a particular moment of
their life they aren’t capable of doing. Michele Solara hadn’t ordered him to
beat up Sarratore’s son, no: he had not told Michele the most important thing
and so there was no reason to go that far; beating him up had been his own
decision, and he had made it partly because he wanted to get Nino away from
Lila  and  give  her  back  what  she  had  incomprehensibly  thrown  away,  and
partly for his own enjoyment, because of an exasperation he felt not toward
Nino, an insignificant limp agglomerate of effeminate flesh and bone, too long
and breakable, but toward what we two girls had attributed and did attribute
to him.
I have to admit that when, some time afterward, he told me that story I
seemed to understand his motivations. It moved me, I caressed his cheek to
console him for his savage feelings. And he reddened, he was flustered; to show
me that he wasn’t a beast he said, “Afterward I helped him.” He had picked up
Sarratore’s son, taken him, half dazed, to a pharmacy, left him at the entrance,
and returned to the neighborhood to talk to Pasquale and Enzo.
They had agreed to meet him reluctantly. They no longer considered him a
friend, especially Pasquale, even though he was his sister’s fiancé. But Antonio
didn’t care, he pretended not to notice, he behaved as if their hostility because
he had sold himself to the Solaras were a gripe that made no dent in their
friendship. He said nothing about Nino, he focused on the fact that he had
found Lila and that they had to help her.
“Do what?” Pasquale had asked, aggressively.
“Go home to her own house: she didn’t go to see Lenuccia, she’s living in a
shitty place in Campi Flegrei.”
“By herself?”
“Yes.”
“And why in the world did she decide to do that?”
“I don’t know, I didn’t talk to her.”
“Why?”
“I found her on behalf of Michele Solara.”
“You’re a shit fascist.”
“I’m nothing, I did a job.”
“Bravo, now what do you want?”
“I haven’t told Michele that I found her.”
“And so?”
“I don’t want to lose my job, I have to think of earning a living. If Michele
finds out that I lied to him he’ll fire me. You go get her and bring her home.”
Pasquale had insulted him grossly again, but even then Antonio scarcely
reacted. He became upset only when his future brother-in-law said that Lila
had done well to leave her husband and all the rest: if she had finally gotten
out  of  the  Solaras’  shop,  if  she  realized  that  she  had  made  a  mistake  in
marrying Stefano, he certainly wouldn’t be the one who brought her back.
“You  want  to  leave  her  in  Campi  Flegrei  by  herself?”  Antonio  asked,
bewildered. “Alone and without a lira?”
“Why, are we rich? Lina is a grownup, she knows what life is: if she made
that decision she has her reasons, let’s leave her in peace.”
“But she helped us whenever she could.”
At that reminder of the money Lila had given them Pasquale was ashamed.
He had stammered some trite stuff about rich and poor, about the condition of
women in the neighborhood and outside it, about the fact that if it was a
matter of giving her money he was ready. But Enzo, who until then had been
silent, broke in with a gesture of annoyance, and said to Antonio, “Give me the
address, I’m going to see what she intends to do.”
94.
He did go, the next day. He took the metro, got out at Campi Flegrei, and
looked for the street, the building.
Of Enzo at that time I knew only that he couldn’t tolerate anything anymore:
the whining of his mother, the burden of his siblings, the Camorra in the fruit-
and-vegetable market, the rounds with the cart, which earned less and less,
Pasquale’s Communist talk, and even his engagement to Carmen. None of it.
But since he was reserved by nature, it was difficult to get an idea of what type
of person he was. From Carmen I had learned that he was secretly studying on
his own, he wanted to get an engineering diploma. It must have been on the
same occasion—Christmas?—that Carmen told me he had kissed her only four
times since he returned from military service, in the spring. She added, with
irritation, “Maybe he’s not a man.”
That was what we often said, we girls, when someone didn’t care much
about us: that he wasn’t a man. Enzo was, wasn’t he? I didn’t know anything
about the dark depths that men could have, none of us did, and so for any
confusing  manifestation  we  had  recourse  to  that  formula.  Some,  like  the
Solaras,  like  Pasquale,  Antonio,  Donato  Sarratore,  even  Franco  Mari,  my
boyfriend at the Normale, wanted us in ways that were different—aggressive,
subordinate, heedless, attentive—but that they wanted us there was no doubt.
Others, like Alfonso, Enzo, Nino, had—according to equally diverse attitudes—
an aloof self-possession, as if between us and them there were a wall and the
work of scaling it were our job. In Enzo, after the Army, this characteristic had
become accentuated, and he not only did nothing to please women but did
nothing to please the entire world. He was short, and yet his body seemed to
have become even smaller, as if through a sort of self-compression: it had
become a compact block of energy. The skin over the bones of his face was
stretched like an awning, and he had reduced motion to the pure compass of
his legs, no other part of him moved, not arms or neck or head, not even his
hair, which was a reddish-blond helmet. When he decided to go and see Lila he
told Pasquale and Antonio, not in order to discuss it but in the form of a brief
statement that served to cut off any discussion. Nor when he arrived at Campi
Flegrei did he display any uncertainty. He found the street, found the doorway,
went up the stairs, and rang with determination at the right door.
95.
When Nino did not return in ten minutes or an hour or even the next day,
Lila turned spiteful. She felt not abandoned but humiliated, and although she
had admitted to herself that she wasn’t the right woman for him, she still
found it unbearable that he, disappearing from her life after only twenty-three
days, had brutally confirmed it. In a rage she threw away everything he had
left: books, underwear, socks, a sweater, even a pencil stub. She did it, she
regretted it, she burst into tears. When finally the tears stopped, she felt ugly,
swollen, stupid, cheapened by the bitter feelings that Nino, Nino whom she
loved and by whom she believed she was loved in return, was provoking. The
apartment seemed suddenly what it was, a squalid place through whose walls
all the noises of the city reached her. She became aware of the bad smell, of the
cockroaches that came in under the stairwell door, the stains of dampness on
the ceiling, and felt for the first time that childhood was clutching at her again,
not the childhood of dreams but the childhood of cruel privations, of threats
and  beatings.  In  fact  suddenly  she  discovered  that  one  fantasy  that  had
comforted us since we were children—to become rich—had evaporated from
her mind. Although the poverty of Campi Flegrei seemed to her darker than in
the neighborhood of our games, although her situation was worse because of
the child she was expecting, although in a few days she had used up the money
she had brought, she discovered that wealth no longer seemed a prize and a
compensation, it no longer spoke to her. The creased and evil-smelling paper
money—piling up in the drawer of the cash register when she worked in the
grocery, or in the colored metal box of the shop in Piazza dei Martiri—that in
adolescence replaced the strongboxes of our childhood, overflowing with gold
pieces and precious stones, no longer functioned: any remaining glitter was
gone.  The  relationship  between  money  and  the  possession  of  things  had
disappointed her. She wanted nothing for herself or for the child she would
have. To be rich for her meant having Nino, and since Nino was gone she felt
poor, a poverty that no money could obliterate. Since there was no remedy for
that new condition—she had made too many mistakes since she was a child,
and they had all converged in that last mistake: to believe that the son of
Sarratore couldn’t do without her as she couldn’t without him, and that theirs
was a unique, exceptional fate, and that the good fortune of loving each other
would last forever and would extinguish the force of any other necessity—she
felt guilty and decided not to go out, not to look for him, not to eat, not to
drink, but to wait for her life and that of the baby to lose their outlines, any
possible definition, and she found that there was nothing left in her mind, not
even a trace of the thing that made her spiteful, that is to say the awareness of
abandonment.
Then someone rang at the door.
She  thought  it  was  Nino:  she  opened  it.  It  was  Enzo.  Seeing  him  didn’t
disappoint her. She thought he had come to bring her some fruit—as he had
done many years earlier, as a child, after he was defeated in the competition
created by the principal and Maestra Oliviero, and had thrown a stone at her—
and she burst out laughing. Enzo considered the laughter a sign of illness. He
went in, but left the door open out of respect, he didn’t want the neighbors to
think she was receiving men like a prostitute. He looked around, he glanced at
her disheveled state, and although he didn’t see what still didn’t show, that is,
the pregnancy, he deduced that she really needed help. In his serious way,
completely without emotion, he said, even before she managed to calm down
and stop laughing: “We’re going now.”
“Where?”
“To your husband.”
“Did he send you?”
“No.”
“Who sent you?”
“No one sent me.”
“I’m not coming.”
“Then I’ll stay here with you.”
“Forever?”
“Until you’re persuaded.”
“And your job?”
“I’m tired of it.”
“And Carmen?”
“You are much more important.”
“I’ll tell her, then she’ll leave you.”
“I’ll tell her, I’ve already decided.”
From then on he spoke distantly, in a low voice. She answered him laughing,
in a teasing way, as if none of their words were real, as if they were speaking in
fun of a world, of people, of feelings that hadn’t existed for a long time. Enzo
realized  that,  and  for  a  while  he  said  nothing  more.  He  went  through  the
house, found Lila’s suitcase, filled it with the things in the drawers, in the
closet. Lila let him do it, because she considered him not the flesh-and-blood
Enzo but a shadow, in color, as in the movies, who although he spoke was
nevertheless  an  effect  of  the  light.  Having  packed  the  suitcase,  Enzo
confronted  her  again  and  made  a  very  surprising  speech.  He  said,  in  his
concentrated yet detached way, “Lina, I’ve loved you since we were children. I
never told you because you are very beautiful and very intelligent, and I am
short, ugly, and worthless. Now return to your husband. I don’t know why you
left him and I don’t want to know. I know only that you can’t stay here, you
don’t deserve to live in filth. I’ll take you to the entrance of the building and
wait: if he treats you badly, I’ll come up and kill him. But he won’t, he’ll be glad
you’ve come back. But let’s make a pact: in the case that you can’t come to an
agreement with your husband, I brought you back to him and I will come and
get you. All right?”
Lila stopped laughing, she narrowed her eyes, she listened to him attentively
for the first time. Interactions between Enzo and her had been very rare until
that moment, but the times I had been present they had always amazed me.
There was something indefinable between them, originating in the confusion
of childhood. She trusted Enzo, I think, she felt she could count on him. When
the  young  man  took  the  suitcase  and  headed  toward  the  door,  which  had
remained open, she hesitated a moment, then followed him.
96.
Enzo did wait under Lila and Stefano’s windows the night he took her home,
and, if Stefano had beaten her, he probably would have gone up and killed him.
But Stefano didn’t beat her; he welcomed her into her home, which was clean
and tidy. He behaved as if his wife really had gone to stay with me in Pisa, even
if there was no evidence that that was what had happened. Lila, on the other
hand, did not take refuge in that excuse or any other. The following day, when
she woke up, she said reluctantly, “I’m pregnant,” and he was so happy that
when she added, “The baby isn’t yours,” he burst out laughing, with genuine
joy. When she angrily repeated that phrase, once, twice, three times, and even
tried to hit him with clenched fists, he cuddled her, kissed her, murmuring,
“Enough, Lina, enough, enough, I’m too happy. I know that I’ve treated you
badly but now let’s stop, don’t say mean things to me,” and his eyes filled with
tears of joy.
Lila knew that people tell themselves lies to defend against the truth of the
facts, but she was amazed that her husband was able to lie to himself with such
joyful conviction. On the other hand she didn’t care, by now, about Stefano or
about herself, and after again repeating for a while, without emotion, “The
baby isn’t yours,” she withdrew into the lethargy of pregnancy. He prefers to
put off the pain, she thought, and all right, let him do as he likes: if he doesn’t
want to suffer now, he’ll suffer later.
She went on to make a list of what she wanted and what she didn’t want: she
didn’t want to work in the shop in Piazza dei Martiri or in the grocery; she
didn’t want to see anyone, friends, relatives, especially the Solaras; she wished
to stay home and be a wife and mother. He agreed, sure that she would change
her mind in a few days. But Lila secluded herself in the apartment, without
showing  any  interest  in  Stefano’s  business,  or  that  of  her  brother  and  her
father, or in the affairs of his relatives or of her own relatives.
A couple of times Pinuccia came with her son, Fernando, whom they called
Dino, but she didn’t open the door.
Once Rino came, very upset, and Lila let him in, listened to all his chatter
about how angry the Solaras were about her disappearance from the shop,
about  how  badly  things  were  going  with  Cerullo  shoes,  because  Stefano
thought only of his own affairs and was no longer investing. When at last he
was silent, she said, “Rino, you’re the older brother, you’re a grownup, you
have a wife and son, do me a favor: live your life without constantly turning to
me.” He was hurt and he went away depressed, after a complaint about how
everyone was getting richer while he, because of his sister, who didn’t care
about the family, the blood of the Cerullos, but now felt she was a Carracci, was
in danger of losing the little he had gained.
It happened that even Michele Solara went to the trouble of coming to see
her—in  the  beginning  even  twice  a  day—at  times  when  he  was  sure  that
Stefano wouldn’t be there. But she never let him in, she sat silently in the
kitchen, almost without breathing, so that once, before he left, he shouted at
her from the street: “Who the fuck do you think you are, whore, you had an
agreement with me and you didn’t keep it.”
Lila welcomed willingly only Nunzia and Stefano’s mother, Maria, both of
whom  followed  her  pregnancy  closely.  She  stopped  throwing  up  but  her
complexion remained gray. She had the impression of having become large
and inflated inside rather than outside, as if within the wrapping of her body
every organ had begun to fatten. Her stomach seemed a bubble of flesh that
was  expanding  because  of  the  baby’s  breathing.  She  was  afraid  of  that
expansion, she feared that the thing she was most afraid of would happen: she
would break apart, overflow. Then suddenly she felt that the being she had
inside, that absurd modality of life, that expanding nodule that at a certain
point would come out of her sex like a puppet on a string—suddenly she loved
it, and through it the sense of herself returned. Frightened by her ignorance,
by the mistakes she could make, she began to read everything she could find
about what pregnancy is, what happens inside the womb, how to prepare for
the birth. She hardly went out at all in those months. She stopped buying
clothes or objects for the house, she got in the habit instead of having her
mother bring at least a couple of newspapers and Alfonso some journals. It was
the only money she spent. Once Carmen showed up to ask for money and she
told her to ask Stefano, she had none; the girl went away discouraged. She
didn’t care about anyone anymore, only the baby.
The experience wounded Carmen, who became even more resentful. She
still hadn’t forgiven Lila for breaking up their alliance in the new grocery. Now
she couldn’t forgive her for not opening her purse. But mainly she couldn’t
forgive her because—as she began to gossip to everyone—she had done as she
liked: she had vanished, she had returned, and yet she continued to play the
part of the lady, to have a nice house, and now even had a baby coming. The
more of a slut you are, the better off you are. She, on the other hand, who
labored  from  morning  to  night  with  no  gratification—only  bad  things
happened to her, one after the other. Her father died in jail. Her mother died in
that way she didn’t even want to think about. And now Enzo as well. He had
waited for her one night outside the grocery and told her that he didn’t want
to  continue  the  engagement.  Just  like  that,  very  few  words,  as  usual,  no
explanation. She had run weeping to her brother, and Pasquale had met Enzo
to ask for an explanation. But Enzo had given none, so now they didn’t speak to
each other.
When  I  returned  from  Pisa  for  Easter  vacation  and  met  Carmen  in  the
gardens, she vented. “I’m an idiot,” she wept, “waiting for him the whole time
he  was  a  soldier.  An  idiot  slaving  from  morning  to  night  for  practically
nothing.”  She  said  she  was  tired  of  everything.  And  with  no  obvious
connection she began to insult Lila. She went so far as to ascribe to her a
relationship with Michele Solara, who had often been seen wandering around
the Carracci house. “Adultery and money,” she hissed, “that’s how she gets
ahead.”
Not  a  word,  however,  about  Nino.  Miraculously,  the  neighborhood  knew
nothing of that. During the same period, Antonio told me about beating him
up, and about how he had sent Enzo to retrieve Lila, but he told only me, and
I’m sure that for his whole life he never spoke a word to anyone else. But I
learned something from Alfonso: insistently questioned, he told me he had
heard from Marisa that Nino had gone to study in Milan. Thanks to them, when
on Holy Saturday I ran into Lila on the stradone, completely by chance, I felt a
subtle pleasure at the idea that I knew more than she about the facts of her life,
and that from what I knew it was easy to deduce how little good it had done
her to take Nino away from me.
Her stomach was already quite big, it was like an excrescence on her thin
body. Even her face didn’t show the florid beauty of pregnant women; it was
ugly, greenish, the skin stretched over the prominent cheekbones. We both
tried to pretend that nothing had happened.
“How are you?”
“Well.”
“Can I touch your stomach?”
“Yes.”
“And that matter?”
“Which?”
“The one on Ischia.”
“It’s over.”
“Too bad.”
“What are you doing?”
“I study, I have a place of my own and all the books I need. I even have a sort
of boyfriend.”
“A sort?”
“Yes.”
“What’s his name?”
“Franco Mari.”
“What does he do?”
“He’s also a student.”
“Those glasses really suit you.”
“Franco gave them to me.”
“And the dress?”
“Also him.”
“He’s rich?”
“Yes.”
“I’m glad.”
“And how is the studying going?”
“I work hard, otherwise they’ll send me away.”
“Be careful.”
“I’m careful.”
“Lucky you.”
“Well.”
She said her due date was in July. She had a doctor, the one who had sent her
to bathe in the sea. A doctor, not the obstetrician in the neighborhood. “I’m
afraid for the baby,” she said. “I don’t want to give birth at home.” She had
read that it was better to go to a clinic. She smiled, she touched her belly. Then
she said something that wasn’t very clear.
“I’m still here just for this.”
“Is it nice to feel the baby inside?”
“No, it repulses me, but I’m pleased to carry it.”
“Was Stefano angry?”
“He wants to believe what’s convenient for him.”
“That is?”
“That for a while I was a little crazy and ran away to you in Pisa.”
I pretended not to know anything, feigning amazement: “In Pisa? You and
me?”
“Yes.”
“And if he asks, should I say that’s what happened?”
“Do as you like.”
We said goodbye, promising to write. But we never wrote and I did nothing
to  find  out  about  the  birth.  Sometimes  a  feeling  stirred  in  me  that  I
immediately  repressed  to  keep  it  from  becoming  conscious:  I  wanted
something to happen to her, so the baby wouldn’t be born.
97.
In that period I often dreamed of Lila. Once she was in bed in a lacy green
nightgown, her hair was braided, which was something she had never done,
she held in her arms a little girl dressed in pink, and she kept saying, in a
sorrowful voice, “Take a picture but only of me, not of the child.” Another time
she  greeted  me  happily  and  then  called  her  daughter,  who  had  my  name.
“Lenù,” she said, “come and say hello to your aunt.” But a fat old giantess
appeared, and Lila ordered me to undress her and wash her and change her
diaper and swaddling. On waking I was tempted to look for a telephone and try
to call Alfonso to find out if the baby had been born without any problems, if
she was happy. But I had to study or maybe I had exams, and I forgot about it.
When, in August, I was free of both obligations, it happened that I didn’t go
home. I wrote some lies to my parents and went with Franco to Versilia, to an
apartment  belonging  to  his  family.  For  the  first  time  I  wore  a  two-piece
bathing suit: it fit in one fist and I felt very bold.
It was at Christmas that I heard from Carmen how difficult Lila’s delivery
had been.
“She almost died,” she said, “so in the end the doctor had to cut open her
stomach, otherwise the baby couldn’t be born.”
“She had a boy?”
“Yes.”
“Is he well?”
“He’s lovely.”
“And she?”
“She’s lost her figure.”
I learned that Stefano wanted to give his son the name of his father, Achille,
but Lila was opposed to it, and the yelling of husband and wife, which hadn’t
been heard for a long time, echoed throughout the clinic, so that the nurses
had reprimanded them. In the end the child was called Gennaro, that is, Rino,
like Lila’s brother.
I  listened,  I  didn’t  say  anything.  I  felt  unhappy,  and  to  cope  with  my
unhappiness I imposed on myself an attitude of reserve. Carmen noticed: “I’m
talking and talking, but you don’t say a word, you make me feel like the TV
news. Don’t you give a damn about us anymore?”
“Of course I do.”
“You’ve gotten pretty, even your voice has changed.”
“Did I have an ugly voice?”
“You had the voice that we have.”
“And now?”
“You have it less.”
I  stayed  in  the  neighborhood  for  ten  days,  from  December  24,  1964,  to
January 3, 1965, but I never went to see Lila. I didn’t want to see her son, I was
afraid of recognizing in his mouth, in his nose, in the shape of his eyes or ears
something of Nino.
At my house now I was treated like an important person who had deigned to
stop  by  for  a  quick  hello.  My  father  observed  me  with  pleasure.  I  felt  his
satisfied gaze on me, but if I spoke to him he became embarrassed. He didn’t
ask  what  I  was  studying,  what  was  the  use  of  it,  what  job  I  would  have
afterward, and not because he didn’t want to know but out of fear that he
wouldn’t understand my answers. My mother instead moved angrily through
the house, and, hearing her unmistakable footsteps, I thought of how I had
been afraid of becoming like her. But, luckily, I had outdistanced her, and she
felt it, she resented me for it. Even now, when she spoke to me, it was as if I
were guilty of terrible things: in every situation I perceived in her voice a
shadow of disapproval, but, unlike in the past, she never wanted me to do the
dishes, clean up, wash the floors. There was some uneasiness also with my
sister and brothers. They tried to speak to me in Italian and often corrected
their own mistakes, ashamed. But I tried to show them that I was the same as
ever, and gradually they were persuaded.
At night I didn’t know how to pass the time, my old friends were no longer a
group. Pasquale had terrible relations with Antonio and avoided him at all
costs. Antonio didn’t want to see anyone, partly because he didn’t have time
(he was constantly being sent here and there by the Solaras), partly because he
didn’t know what to talk about: he couldn’t talk about his work and he didn’t
have a private life. Ada, after the grocery, either hurried home to take care of
her mother and siblings or was tired and depressed, and went to bed, so that
she hardly ever saw Pasquale, and this made him very anxious. Carmen now
hated everything and everyone, maybe even me: she hated the job in the new
grocery, the Carraccis, Enzo, who had left her, her brother, who had confined
himself  to  quarreling  about  it  and  hadn’t  beaten  him  up.  Yes,  Enzo.  Enzo,
finally—whose  mother,  Assunta,  was  now  seriously  ill,  and  who,  when  he
wasn’t laboring to earn money during the day, was taking care of her, and at
night, too, and yet, surprisingly, had managed to get his engineer’s diploma—
Enzo was never around. I was curious at the news that he had accomplished
that very difficult goal of getting a diploma by studying on his own. Who would
have imagined, I thought. Before returning to Pisa I made a big effort and
persuaded  him  to  take  a  short  walk.  I  was  full  of  congratulations  for  his
achievement, but he had only a disparaging expression. He had reduced his
vocabulary so far that I did all the talking, he said almost nothing. I remember
only one phrase, which he uttered before we separated. I hadn’t mentioned
Lila until that moment, not even a word. And yet, as if I had talked exclusively
about her, he said suddenly, “Anyway, Lina is the best mother in the whole
neighborhood.”
That  anyway  put  me  in  a  bad  mood.  I  had  never  thought  of  Enzo  as
particularly sensitive, but on that occasion I was sure that, walking beside me,
he had felt—felt as if I had proclaimed it aloud—the long mute list of wrongs
that I attributed to our friend, as if my body had angrily articulated it without
my knowing.
98.
For love of little Gennaro, Lila began to go out again. She put the baby,
dressed  in  blue  or  white,  in  the  cumbersome,  enormous,  and  expensive
carriage that her brother had given her and walked alone through the new
neighborhood. As soon as Rinuccio cried, she went to the grocery and nursed
him, amid the enthusiasm of her mother-in-law, the tender compliments of the
customers, and the annoyance of Carmen, who lowered her head, and said not
a word. Lila fed the baby as soon as he cried. She liked feeling him attached to
her,  she  liked  feeling  the  milk  that  ran  out  of  her  into  him,  pleasantly
emptying her breast. It was the only bond that gave her a sense of well-being,
and she confessed in her notebooks that she feared the moment when the baby
would separate from her.
When the weather turned nice, she started going to the gardens in front of
the church, since in the new neighborhood there were only bare streets with a
few  bushes  or  sickly  saplings.  Passersby  stopped  to  look  at  the  baby  and
praised him, which pleased her. If she had to change him, she went to the old
grocery,  where,  as  soon  as  she  entered,  the  customers  greeted  Gennaro
warmly. Ada, however, with her smock that was too tidy, the lipstick on her
thin  lips,  her  pale  face,  her  neat  hair,  her  commanding  ways  even  toward
Stefano, was increasingly impudent, acting like a servant-mistress, and, since
she was busy, she did everything possible to let Lila understand that she, the
carriage, and the baby were in the way. But Lila took little notice. The surly
indifference of her husband confused her more: in private, inattentive but not
hostile to the baby, in public, in front of the customers who spoke in tender
childish voices and wanted to hold him and kiss him, he didn’t even look at
him, in fact he made a show of disinterest. Lila went to the rear of the shop,
washed Gennaro, quickly dressed him again, and went back to the gardens.
There she examined her son lovingly, searching for signs of Nino in his face,
and wondering if Stefano had seen what she couldn’t.
But soon she forgot about it. In general the days passed over her without
provoking the least emotion. She mostly took care of her son, the reading of a
book might last weeks, two or three pages a day. In the gardens, if the baby was
sleeping, every so often she let herself be distracted by the branches of the
trees that were putting out new buds, and she wrote in one of her battered
notebooks.
Once she noticed that there was a funeral in the church, and when, with the
baby, she went to see, she discovered that it was the funeral of Enzo’s mother.
She saw him, stiff, pale, but she didn’t offer her condolences. Another time she
was sitting on a bench with the carriage beside her, bent over a large volume
with a green spine, when a skinny old woman appeared before her, leaning on
a cane; her cheeks seemed to be sucked into her throat by her very breathing.
“Guess who I am.”
Lila had trouble recognizing her, but finally the woman’s eyes, in a flash,
recalled the imposing Maestra Oliviero. She jumped up full of emotion, about
to embrace her, but the teacher drew back in annoyance. Lila then showed her
the baby, said proudly, “His name is Gennaro,” and since everyone praised her
son she expected that the teacher would, too. But Maestra Oliviero completely
ignored  the  child,  she  seemed  interested  only  in  the  heavy  book  that  her
former pupil was holding, a finger in the pages to mark her place.
“What is it?”
Lila became nervous. The teacher’s looks had changed, her voice, everything
about her, except her eyes and the sharp tones, the same tones as when she
had asked her a question in the classroom. So she, too, showed that she hadn’t
changed, she answered in a lazy yet aggressive way: “The title is Ulysses.”
“Is it about the Odyssey?”
“No, it’s about how prosaic life is today.”
“And so?”
“That’s all. It says that our heads are full of nonsense. That we are flesh,
blood, and bone. That one person has the same value as another. That we want
only to eat, drink, fuck.”
The teacher reproached her for that last word, as in school, and Lila posed as
an insolent girl, and laughed, so that the old woman became even sterner,
asked her how the book was. She answered that it was difficult and she didn’t
completely understand it.
“Then why are you reading it?”
“Because someone I knew read it. But he didn’t like it.”
“And you?”
“I do.”
“Even if it’s difficult?”
“Yes.”
“Don’t read books that you can’t understand, it’s bad for you.”
“A lot of things are bad for you.”
“You’re not happy?”
“So-so.”
“You were destined for great things.”
“I’ve done them: I’m married and I’ve had a baby.”
“Everyone can do that.”
“I’m like everyone.”
“You’re wrong.”
“No, you are wrong, and you always were wrong.”
“You were rude as a child and you’re rude now.”
“Clearly you weren’t much of a teacher as far as I’m concerned.”
Maestra Oliviero looked at her carefully and Lila read in her face the anxiety
of being wrong. The teacher was trying to find in her eyes the intelligence she
had seen when she was a child, she wanted confirmation that she hadn’t been
wrong. She thought: I have to remove from my face every sign that makes her
right, I don’t want her to preach to me how I’m wasted. But meanwhile she felt
exposed  to  yet  another  examination,  and,  contradictorily,  she  feared  the
result.  She  is  discovering  that  I  am  stupid,  she  said  to  herself,  her  heart
pounding harder, she is discovering that my whole family is stupid, that my
forebears were stupid and my descendants will be stupid, that Gennaro will be
stupid. She became upset, she put the book in her bag, she grabbed the handle
of the carriage, she said nervously that she had to go. Crazy old lady, she still
believed she could rap me on the knuckles. She left the teacher in the gardens,
small, clutching her cane, consumed by an illness that she would not give in to.
99.
Lila began to be obsessed with stimulating her son’s intelligence. She didn’t
know what books to buy and asked Alfonso to find out from the booksellers.
Alfonso brought her a couple of volumes and she dedicated herself to them. In
her notebooks I found notes on how she was reading the difficult texts: she
struggled to advance, page by page, but after a while she lost the thread, she
thought of something else; yet she forced her eye to keep gliding along the
lines, her fingers turned the pages automatically, and by the end she had the
impression  that,  even  though  she  hadn’t  understood,  the  words  had
nevertheless  entered  her  brain  and  inspired  thoughts.  Starting  there,  she
reread the book and, reading, corrected her thoughts or amplified them, until
the text was no longer useful, she looked for others.
Her husband came home at night and found that she hadn’t cooked dinner,
that she had the baby playing games she had invented herself. He got angry,
but she, as had happened for a long time, didn’t react. It was as if she didn’t
hear him, as if the house were inhabited only by her and her son, and when she
got up and started cooking she did it not because Stefano was hungry but
because she was.
In those months their relationship, after a long period of mutual tolerance,
began to deteriorate again. Stefano told her one night that he was tired of her,
of  the  baby,  of  everything.  Another  time  he  said  that  he  had  married  too
young, without understanding what he was doing. But once she answered, “I
don’t know what I’m doing here, either, I’ll take the baby and go,” and he,
instead of telling her to get out, lost his temper, as he hadn’t for a long time,
and hit her in front of the child, who stared at her from the blanket on the
floor,  dazed  by  the  uproar.  Her  nose  dripping  blood  and  Stefano  shouting
insults at her, Lila turned to her son laughing, told him in Italian (she had been
speaking to him only in Italian for a long time), “Papa’s playing, we’re having
fun.”
I don’t know why, but at a certain point she began to take care of Dino, her
nephew. It’s possible that it began because she needed to compare Gennaro to
another child. Or maybe not, maybe she felt a qualm that she was devoting all
her attention only to her own son and it seemed right to take care of her
nephew as well. Pinuccia, although she still considered Dino the living proof of
the disaster that her life was, and was always yelling at him, and sometimes hit
him (“Will you stop it, will you stop it? What do you want from me, you want to
make me crazy?”), was resolutely opposed to having Lila take him to her house
to play mysterious games with little Gennaro. She said to her angrily: “You
take care of raising your son and I’ll take care of mine, and instead of wasting
time  take  care  of  your  husband,  otherwise  you’ll  lose  him.”  But  here  Rino
intervened.
It was a terrible time for Lila’s brother. He fought constantly with his father,
who wanted to close the shoe factory because he was sick of working only to
enrich the Solaras and, not understanding that it was necessary to go on at all
costs,  regretted  his  old  workshop.  He  fought  constantly  with  Michele  and
Marcello,  who  treated  him  like  a  petulant  boy  and  when  the  problem  was
money spoke directly to Stefano. And mainly he fought with Stefano, shouting
and  insulting,  because  his  brother-in-law  wouldn’t  give  him  a  cent  and,
according  to  him,  was  now  negotiating  secretly  to  deliver  the  whole  shoe
business into the hands of the Solaras. He fought with Pinuccia, who accused
him of having led her to believe he was a big shot when really he was a puppet
who could be manipulated by anyone, by his father, by Stefano, by Marcello
and Michele. So, when he realized that Stefano was mad at Lila because she was
being too much a mamma and not enough a wife, and that Pinuccia wouldn’t
entrust the child to her sister-in-law for even an hour, he began, defiantly, to
take the baby to his sister himself, and since there was less and less work at the
shoe  factory,  he  got  in  the  habit  of  staying,  sometimes  for  hours,  in  the
apartment in the new neighborhood to see what Lila did with Gennaro and
Dino. He was fascinated by her maternal patience, by the way the children
played, by the way his son, who at home was always crying or sat listlessly in
his playpen like a sad puppy, with Lila became eager, quick, seemed happy.
“What do you do to them?” he asked admiringly.
“I make them play.”
“My son played before.”
“Here he plays and learns.”
“Why do you spend so much time on it?”
“Because I read that everything we are is decided now, in the first years of
life.”
“And is mine doing well?”
“You see him.”
“Yes, I see, he’s better than yours.”
“Mine is younger.”
“Do you think Dino is intelligent?”
“All children are, you just have to train them.”
“Then train them, Lina, don’t get tired of it immediately the way you usually
do. Make him very intelligent for me.”
But one evening Stefano came home early and especially irritable. He found
his brother-in-law sitting on the kitchen floor and, instead of confining himself
to a harsh look because of the mess, his wife’s lack of interest, the attention
given to the children instead of to him, said to Rino that this was his house,
that he didn’t like seeing him around every day wasting time, that the shoe
factory was failing precisely because he was so idle, that the Cerullos were
unreliable—in other words, Get out immediately or I’ll kick your ass.
There was a commotion. Lila cried that he mustn’t speak like that to her
brother,  Rino  threw  in  his  brother-in-law’s  face  everything  that  until  that
moment he had only hinted at or had prudently kept to himself. Gross insults
flew.  The  two  children,  abandoned  in  the  confusion,  began  grabbing  each
other’s toys, crying, especially the smaller one, who was overpowered by the
bigger one. Rino shouted at Stefano, his neck swollen, his veins like electric
cables, that it was easy to be the boss with the goods that Don Achille had
stolen from half the neighborhood, and added, “You’re nothing, you’re just a
piece of shit, your father at least knew how to commit a crime, you don’t even
know that.”
It was a terrible moment, which Lila watched in terror. Stefano seized Rino
by the hips with both hands, like a ballet dancer with his partner, and although
they were of the same height, the same build, although Rino struggled and
yelled and spit, Stefano picked him up with a prodigious force and hurled him
against a wall. Right afterward he took him by the arm and dragged him across
the floor to the door, opened it, pulled him to his feet and threw him down the
stairs, even though Rino tried to resist, even though Lila had roused herself
and was clinging to Stefano, begging him to calm down.
100.
A complicated period began. Rino stopped going to his sister’s house, but
Lila didn’t want to give up keeping Rinuccio and Dino together, so she got in
the habit of going to her brother’s house, but in secret from Stefano. Pinuccia
endured it, sullenly, and at first Lila tried to explain to her what she was doing:
exercises in reactivity, games of skill, she went so far as to confide in her that
she would have liked to involve all the neighborhood children. But Pinuccia
said simply, “You’re a lunatic and I don’t give a damn what nonsense you get
up to. You want to take the child? You want to kill him, you want to eat him
like the witches? Go ahead, I don’t want him and I never did, your brother has
been the ruin of my life and you are the ruin of my brother’s life.” Then she
cried, “That poor devil is perfectly right to cheat on you.”
Lila didn’t react.
She didn’t ask what that remark meant, in fact she made a careless gesture,
one of those gestures that you make to brush away a fly. She took Rinuccio
and, although she was sorry to be deprived of her nephew, she did not return.
But in the solitude of her apartment she discovered that she was afraid. She
absolutely didn’t care if Stefano was paying some whore, in fact she was glad—
she didn’t have to submit at night when he approached her. But after that
remark of Pinuccia’s she began to worry about the baby: if her husband had
taken another woman, if he wanted her every day and every hour, he might go
mad, he might throw her out. Until that moment the possibility of a definitive
break in her marriage had seemed to her a liberation; now instead she was
afraid of losing the house, the money, the time, everything that allowed her to
bring up the child in the best way.
She  hardly  slept.  Maybe  Stefano’s  rages  were  not  only  the  sign  of  a
constitutional lack of equilibrium, the bad blood that blew the lid off good-
natured  habits:  maybe  he  really  was  in  love  with  someone  else,  as  had
happened  to  her  with  Nino,  and  he  couldn’t  stand  to  stay  in  the  cage  of
marriage, of paternity, even of groceries and other dealings. She felt she had to
make up her mind to confront the situation, if only to control it, and yet she
delayed, she gave it up, she counted on the fact that Stefano enjoyed his lover
and left her in peace. Ultimately, she thought, I just have to hold out for a
couple of years, long enough for the child to grow up and be educated.
She organized her day so that he would always find the house in order,
dinner ready, the table set. But, after the scene with Rino, he did not return to
his former mildness, he was always disgruntled, always preoccupied.
“What’s wrong?”
“Money.”
“Money and that’s all?”
Stefano got angry: “What does and that’s all mean?”
For him there was no other problem, in life, but money. After dinner he did
the accounts and cursed the whole time: the new grocery wasn’t taking in cash
as it used to; the Solaras, especially Michele, were acting as if the shoe business
were all theirs and the profits weren’t to be shared anymore; without saying
anything to him, Rino, and Fernando, they were having the old Cerullo models
made by cheap shoemakers on the outskirts, and meanwhile they were having
new Solara styles designed by artisans who in fact were simply making tiny
variations in Lila’s; in this way the small enterprise of his father-in-law and
brother-in-law really was being ruined, dragging him down with it, the one
who had invested in it.
“Understand?”
“Yes.”
“So try not to be a pain in the ass.”
But Lila wasn’t convinced. She had the impression that her husband was
deliberately amplifying problems that were real but old, in order to hide from
her  the  true,  new  reasons  for  his  outbursts  and  his  increasingly  explicit
hostility toward her. He blamed her for all sorts of things, and especially for
having complicated his relations with the Solaras. Once he yelled at her, “What
did you do to that bastard Michele, I’d like to know?”
And she answered, “Nothing.”
And he: “It can’t be, in every discussion he brings you up but he screws me:
try to talk to him and find out what he wants, otherwise I ought to smash your
faces, both of you.”
And Lila, impulsively: “If he wants to fuck me what should I do, let him fuck
me?”
A  moment  later  she  was  sorry  she  had  said  that—sometimes  contempt
prevailed over prudence—but now she had done it and Stefano hit her. The
slap counted little, it wasn’t even with his hand open, as usual, he hit her with
the tips of his fingers. Rather, what he said right afterward, disgusted, carried
more weight:
“You read, you study, but you’re vulgar: I can’t bear people like you, you
make me sick.”
From then on he came home later and later. On Sunday, instead of sleeping
until midday as usual, he went out early and disappeared for the whole day. At
the least hint from her of concrete family problems, he got angry. For example,
on the first hot days she was preoccupied about a vacation at the beach for
Rinuccio,  and  she  asked  her  husband  how  they  should  organize  it.  He
answered: “You take the bus and go to Torregaveta.”
She ventured: “Isn’t it better to rent a house?”
He: “Why, so you can be a whore from morning to night?”
He left, and didn’t return that night.
Everything became clear soon afterward. Lila went to the city with the child,
she was looking for a book that she had found quoted in another book, but she
couldn’t find it. After much searching she went on to Piazza dei Martiri, to ask
Alfonso, who was still happily managing the shop, if he could find it. She ran
into a handsome young man, very well dressed, one of the handsomest men
she had ever seen, his name was Fabrizio. He wasn’t a customer, he was a
friend of Alfonso’s. Lila stayed to talk to him, she discovered that he knew a lot.
They  discussed  literature,  the  history  of  Naples,  how  to  teach  children,
something  about  which  Fabrizio,  who  worked  at  the  university,  was  very
knowledgeable. Alfonso listened in silence the whole time and when Rinuccio
began to whine he calmed him. Then some customers arrived, Alfonso went to
take care of them. Lila talked to Fabrizio a little more; it was a long time since
she had felt the pleasure of a conversation that excited her. When the young
man had to leave, he kissed her with childish enthusiasm, then did the same
with Alfonso, two big smacking kisses. He called to her from the doorway: “It
was lovely talking to you.”
“For me, too.”
Lila  was  sad.  While  Alfonso  continued  to  wait  on  customers,  she
remembered  the  people  she  had  met  in  that  place,  and  Nino,  the  lowered
shutter,  the  shadowy  light,  the  pleasant  conversations,  the  way  he  arrived
secretly,  exactly  at  one,  and  disappeared  at  four,  after  they  made  love.  It
seemed to her an imaginary time, a bizarre fantasy, and she looked around
uneasily. She didn’t feel nostalgia for it, she didn’t feel nostalgia for Nino. She
felt only that time had passed, that what had been important was important no
longer, that the tangle in her head endured and wouldn’t come untangled. She
took the child and was about to leave when Michele Solara came in.
He greeted her enthusiastically, he played with Gennaro, he said that the
baby was just like her. He invited her to a bar, bought her a coffee, decided to
take her home in his car. Once they were in the car he said to her, “Leave your
husband, right away, today. I’ll take you and your son. I’ve bought a house on
the Vomero, in Piazza degli Artisti. If you want I’ll drive you there now, I’ll
show it to you, I took it with you in mind. There you can do what you like: read,
write, invent things, sleep, laugh, talk, and be with Rinuccio. I’m interested
only in being able to look at you and listen to you.”
For the first time in his life Michele expressed himself without his teasing
tone of voice. As he drove and talked he glanced at her obliquely, slightly
anxious, to see her reactions. Lila stared at the street in front of her the whole
way,  trying,  meanwhile,  to  take  the  pacifier  out  of  Gennaro’s  mouth,  she
thought  he  used  it  too  much.  But  the  child  pushed  her  hand  away
energetically. When Michele stopped—she didn’t interrupt him—she asked:
“Are you finished?”
“Yes.”
“And Gigliola?”
“What does Gigliola have to do with it? You say yes or no, and then we’ll
see.”
“No, Michè, the answer is no. I didn’t want your brother and I don’t want
you, either. First, because I don’t like either of you; and second because you
think you can do anything and take anything without regard.”
Michele didn’t react right away, he muttered something about the pacifier,
like: Give it to him, don’t let him cry. Then he said, threateningly, “Think hard
about it, Lina. Tomorrow you may be sorry and you’ll come begging to me.”
“I rule it out.”
“Yes? Then listen to me.”
He revealed to her what everyone knew (“Even your mother, your father,
and that shit your brother, but they tell you nothing in order to keep the
peace”): Stefano had taken Ada as a lover, and not recently. The thing had
begun before the vacation on Ischia. “When you were on vacation,” he said,
“she went to your house every night.” With Lila’s return the two had stopped
for a while. But they hadn’t been able to resist: they had started again, had left
each  other  again,  had  gone  back  together  when  Lila  disappeared  from  the
neighborhood. Recently Stefano had rented an apartment on the Rettifilo, they
saw each other there.
“Do you believe me?”
“Yes.”
“And so?”
So what. Lila was disturbed not so much by the fact that her husband had a
lover  and  that  the  lover  was  Ada  but  by  the  absurdity  of  every  word  and
gesture of his when he came to get her on Ischia. The shouts, the blows, the
departure returned to her mind.
She said to Michele: “You make me sick, you, Stefano, all of you.”
101.
Lila suddenly felt that she was in the right and this calmed her. That evening
she put Gennaro to bed and waited for Stefano to come home. He returned a
little after midnight, and found her sitting at the kitchen table. Lila looked up
from the book she was reading, said she knew about Ada, she knew how long it
had been going on, and that it didn’t matter to her at all. “What you have done
to me I did to you,” she said clearly, smiling, and repeated to him—how many
times had she said it in the past, two, three?—that Gennaro wasn’t his son. She
concluded that he could do what he liked, sleep where and with whom he
wanted. “The essential thing,” she cried suddenly, “is that you don’t touch me
again.”
I don’t know what she had in mind, maybe she just wanted to get things out
in the open. Or maybe she was prepared for anything and everything. She
expected that he would confess, that then he would beat her, chase her out of
the house, make her, his wife, be a servant to his lover. She was prepared for
every possible aggression and the arrogance of a man who feels that he is the
master and has money to buy whatever he wants. Instead, getting to words
that would clarify and sanction the failure of their marriage was impossible.
Stefano denied it. He said, menacing, but calm, that Ada was merely the clerk
in his grocery, that whatever gossip circulated about them had no basis. Then
he got mad and told her that if she said that ugly thing about his son again, as
God was his witness he would kill her: Gennaro was the image of him, identical,
and everyone confirmed it, to keep provoking him on this point was useless.
Finally—and this was the most surprising thing—he declared to her, as he had
done at other times in the past, without varying the formulas, his love. He said
that he would love her forever, because she was his wife, because they had
been married before the priest and nothing could separate them. When he
came over to kiss her and she pushed him away, he grabbed her, lifted her up,
carried her to the bedroom, where the baby’s cradle was, tore off everything
she had on and entered her forcibly, while she begged him in a low voice,
repressing  sobs:  “Rinuccio  will  wake  up,  see  us,  hear  us,  please  let’s  go  in
there.”
102.
After that night Lila lost many of the small freedoms that remained to her.
Stefano’s behavior was completely contradictory. Since his wife now knew of
his  relationship  with  Ada,  he  abandoned  all  caution.  Often  he  didn’t  come
home to sleep; every other Sunday he went out in the car with his lover. In
August, he went on a vacation with her: they went to Stockholm in the sports
car, even though officially Ada had gone to Turin, to visit a cousin who worked
at Fiat. At the same time, a sick form of jealousy exploded in him: he didn’t
want his wife to leave the house, he obliged her to do the shopping by phone
and  if  she  went  out  for  an  hour  so  that  the  baby  could  get  some  air  he
interrogated her on whom she had met, whom she had talked to. He felt more
a husband than ever and he watched her. It was as if he feared that his betrayal
of her authorized her to betray him. What he did in his encounters with Ada on
the Rettifilo stirred his imagination and led him to detailed fantasies in which
Lila did even more with her lovers. He was afraid of being made ridiculous by a
possible unfaithfulness on her part, while he did nothing to hide his own.
He wasn’t jealous of all men, he had a hierarchy. Lila quickly understood
that in particular he was preoccupied by Michele, by whom he felt cheated in
everything and as if kept in a position of permanent subjugation. Although she
had never said anything about the time Solara had tried to kiss her, or of his
proposal that she become his lover, Stefano had perceived that to insult him by
taking  his  wife  was  an  important  move  in  the  process  of  ruining  him  in
business. But on the other hand the logic of business meant that Lila should
behave at least a little cordially. As a result whatever she did he didn’t like. At
times he pressed her obsessively: “Did you see Michele, did you talk to him, did
he ask you to design new shoes?” Sometimes he shouted at her: “You are not
even to say hello to that shit, is that clear?” And he opened all her drawers,
rummaged through them in search of evidence of her nature as a whore.
To further complicate the situation first Pasquale interfered, then Rino.
Pasquale naturally was the last to know, even after Lila, that his fiancée was
Stefano’s lover. No one told him, he saw them with his own eyes, late on a
Sunday  afternoon  in  September,  coming  out  of  a  doorway  on  the  Rettifilo
embracing.  Ada  had  told  him  that  she  had  things  to  do  with  Melina  and
couldn’t  see  him.  Besides,  he  was  always  out  at  work  or  at  his  political
meetings, and took little notice of his fiancée’s distortions and evasions. Seeing
them  caused  him  terrible  pain,  complicated  by  the  fact  that,  while  his
immediate  impulse  would  have  been  to  kill  them  both,  his  education  as  a
militant Communist prohibited him. Pasquale had recently become secretary
of the neighborhood section of the Party and although in the past, like all the
boys we had grown up with, he had classified us when necessary as whores, he
now  felt—since  he  kept  himself  up  to  date,  read  l’Unità,  studied  booklets,
presided over debates in the section—that he could no longer do that, in fact
he made an effort to consider us women not inferior, generally speaking, to
men, with our feelings, our ideas, our freedoms. Caught, therefore, between
rage and broad-mindedness, the next night, still dirty from work, he went to
Ada and told her that he knew everything. She appeared relieved and admitted
it, cried, begged forgiveness. When he asked if she had done it for money, she
answered that she loved Stefano and that she alone knew what a good and
generous and kind person he was. The result was that Pasquale punched the
kitchen wall in the Cappuccio house, and returned home weeping, his knuckles
sore. Afterward he talked to Carmen all night, the sister and brother suffered
together, one because of Ada, the other because of Enzo, whom she couldn’t
forget. Things really took a bad turn when Pasquale, although he had been
betrayed, decided that he had to defend the dignity of both Ada and Lila. First
he wanted to clarify things, and went to talk to Stefano; he made a complicated
speech whose essence was that he should leave his wife and set up a household
with his lover. Then he went to Lila and reproached her because she let Stefano
trample on her rights as a wife and her feelings as a woman. One morning—it
was six-thirty—Stefano confronted him just as he was leaving to go to work
and good-naturedly offered him money so that he would stop bothering him,
his wife, and Ada. Pasquale took the money, counted it, and threw it away,
saying,  “I’ve  worked  since  I  was  a  child,  I  don’t  need  you,”  then,  as  if  to
apologize, he added that he had to go, otherwise he would be late and would be
fired. But when he had gone some distance he had a second thought, he turned
and shouted at the grocer, who was picking up the money scattered on the
street: “You are worse than that fascist pig your father.” They fought, savagely,
they had to be separated or they would have murdered each other.
Then came the trouble from Rino. He couldn’t bear the fact that his sister
had stopped trying to make Dino a very intelligent child. He couldn’t bear the
fact that his brother-in-law not only wouldn’t give him a cent but had even laid
hands on him. He couldn’t bear the fact that the relation between Stefano and
Ada had become public knowledge, with all the humiliating consequences for
Lila. And he reacted in an unexpected way. Since Stefano beat Lila, he began to
beat Pinuccia. Since Stefano had a lover, he found a lover. He started, that is,
on a persecution of Stefano’s sister that mirrored what his sister was subjected
to by Stefano.
This threw Pinuccia into despair: with tears, with entreaties, she begged him
to end it. But no. If she merely opened her mouth Rino, blinded by rage, and
frightening even Nunzia, shouted at her: “I should end it? I should calm down?
Then go to your brother and tell him that he should leave Ada, that he should
respect Lina, that we have to be a united family and that he should give me the
money that he and the Solaras have cheated me of and are cheating me of.”
The result was that Pinuccia very often ran out of the house, looking battered,
and went to the grocery, to her brother, and sobbed in front of Ada and the
customers. Stefano dragged her into the rear of the shop and she listed all her
husband’s demands, but concluded, “Don’t give that bastard anything, come
home now and kill him.”
103.
This was more or less the situation when I returned to the neighborhood for
the Easter vacation. I had been living in Pisa for two and a half years, I was a
very brilliant student, and returning to Naples for the holidays had become an
ordeal  that  I  submitted  to  in  order  to  avoid  arguments  with  my  parents,
especially with my mother. As soon as the train entered the station I became
nervous. I feared that some accident would prevent me from returning to the
Normale at the end of the vacation: a serious illness that obliged me to enter
the chaos of a hospital, some dreadful event that forced me to stop studying
because the family needed me.
I had been home for a few hours. My mother had just given me a malicious
report on the ugly affairs of Lila, Stefano, Ada, Pasquale, Rino, on the shoe
factory that was about to close, on how these were times when one year you
had money, you thought you were somebody, you bought a sports car, and the
next year you had to sell everything, you ended up in Signora Solara’s red book
and stopped acting like a big shot. And here she cut off her litany and said to
me, “Your friend thought she really had arrived, the wedding of a princess, the
big car, the new house, and yet today you are much smarter and much prettier
than she is.” Then she frowned, to repress her satisfaction, and handed me a
note that, naturally, she had read, even though it was for me. Lila wanted to
see me, she invited me to lunch the next day, Holy Friday.
That was not the only invitation I had, the days were full. Soon afterward
Pasquale called me from the courtyard and, as if I were descending from an
Olympus instead of from my parents’ dark house, wanted to expound to me his
ideas about women, to tell me how much he was suffering, find out what I
thought of his behavior. Pinuccia did the same in the evening, furious with
both Rino and Lila. Ada, unexpectedly, did the same the next morning, burning
with hatred and a sense of injury.
With all three I assumed a distant tone. I urged Pasquale to be calm, Pinuccia
to concern herself with her son, and Ada to try to understand if it was true
love. In spite of the superficiality of the words, I have to say that she interested
me most. While she spoke, I stared at her as if she were a book. She was the
daughter  of  Melina  the  madwoman,  the  sister  of  Antonio.  In  her  face  I
recognized her mother, and many features of her brother. She had grown up
without a father, exposed to every danger, used to working. She had washed
the stairs of our buildings for years, with Melina, whose brain had suddenly
stopped functioning. The Solaras had picked her up in their car when she was a
girl and I could imagine what they had done to her. It seemed therefore normal
that she should fall in love with Stefano, the courteous boss. She loved him, she
told me, they loved each other. “Tell Lina,” she said, her eyes shining with
passion, “that one cannot command one’s heart, and that if she is the wife I am
the  one  who  has  given  and  gives  Stefano  everything,  every  attention  and
feeling that a man could want, and soon children, too, and so he is mine, he no
longer belongs to her.”
I understood that she wanted to get everything possible for herself, Stefano,
the grocery stores, the money, the house, the cars. And I thought it was her
right to fight that battle, which we were all fighting, one way or another. I
tried  to  make  her  calm  down,  because  she  was  very  pale,  her  eyes  were
inflamed. And I was happy to hear how grateful she was to me, I was pleased to
be consulted like a seer, handing out advice in a good Italian that confused her,
as  it  did  Pasquale  and  Pinuccia.  Here,  I  thought  sarcastically,  is  the  use  of
history exams, classical philology, linguistics, and the thousands of file cards
with which I drill myself rigorously: to soothe them for a few hours. They
considered me impartial, without malicious feelings or passions, sterilized by
study. And I accepted the role that they assigned me without mentioning my
own suffering, my audaciousness, the times I had risked everything by letting
Franco come to my room or sneaking into his, the vacation we had taken by
ourselves in Versilia, living together as if we were married. I felt pleased with
myself.
But as the time for lunch approached, the pleasure gave way to uneasiness, I
went to Lila’s unwillingly. I was afraid that she would find a way to restore in a
flash the old hierarchy, causing me to lose faith in my choices. I feared that she
would point out Nino’s features in little Gennaro to remind me that the toy
that was supposed to be mine had fallen to her. But it wasn’t like that. Rinuccio
—so she called him more and more frequently—touched me immediately: he
was a handsome dark boy, and Nino hadn’t yet emerged in his face and body,
his features recalled Lila and even Stefano, as if all three had produced him. As
for her, I felt that she had rarely been more fragile than she was then. At the
mere sight of me her eyes shone with tears and her whole body trembled, I had
to hold her tight to quiet her.
I noticed that in order not to make a bad impression she had combed her
hair in a hurry, in a hurry had put on a little lipstick and a dress of pearl-gray
rayon from the time of her engagement, that she wore shoes with a heel. She
was still beautiful, but it was as if the bones of her face had become larger, her
eyes smaller, and under the skin blood no longer circulated but an opaque
liquid. She was very thin, embracing her I felt her bones, the clinging dress
showed her swollen stomach.
At first she pretended that everything was fine. She was happy that I was
enthusiastic about the baby, she liked the way I played with him, she wanted to
show  me  all  the  things  that  Rinuccio  could  say  and  do.  She  began,  in  an
anxious way that was unfamiliar, to pour out the terminology she had picked
up from the chaotic reading she had done. She cited authors I had never heard
of, made her son show off in exercises that she had invented for him. I noticed
that she had developed a sort of tic, an expression of her mouth: she opened it
suddenly  and  then  pressed  her  lips  together  as  if  to  contain  the  emotion
produced  by  the  things  she  was  saying.  Usually  the  expression  was
accompanied by a reddening of her eyes, a rosy light that the contraction of
her  lips,  like  a  spring  mechanism,  promptly  helped  to  reabsorb.  She  kept
repeating that if she had dedicated herself assiduously to every child in the
neighborhood,  in  a  generation  everything  would  change,  there  would  no
longer be the smart and the incompetent, the good and the bad. Then she
looked at her son and again burst out crying. “He’s ruined the books,” she said
between her tears, as if it were Rinuccio who had done it, and she showed them
to me, torn, ripped in half. I had trouble understanding that the guilty person
was not the little boy but her husband. “He’s got in the habit of rummaging
among  my  things,”  she  murmured,  “he  doesn’t  want  me  to  have  even  a
thought of my own and if he discovers that I’ve hidden even some insignificant
thing he beats me.” She climbed up on a chair and took from on top of the
wardrobe in the bedroom a metal box, and handed it to me. “Here’s everything
that happened with Nino,” she said, “and so many thoughts that have gone
through my head in these years, and also things of mine and yours that we
haven’t said. Take it away, I’m afraid that he’ll find it and start reading. But I
don’t want him to, they aren’t things for him, they aren’t for anyone, not even
for you.”
104.
I took the box unwillingly, I thought: where will I put it, what can I do with
it. We sat at the table. I marveled that Rinuccio ate by himself, that he used his
own small set of wooden implements, that, after his initial shyness passed, he
spoke to me in Italian without mangling the words, that he answered each of
my questions directly, with precision, and asked me questions in turn. Lila let
me talk to her son, she ate almost nothing, she stared at her plate, absorbed. At
the end, when I was about to go, she said: “I don’t remember anything about
Nino, about Ischia, about the shop in Piazza dei Martiri. And yet it seemed to
me that I loved him more than myself. It doesn’t even interest me to know
what happened to him, where he went.”
I thought she was sincere, and said nothing of what I knew.
“Infatuations,” I said, “have this good thing about them: after a while they
pass.”
“Are you happy?”
“Pretty much.”
“How beautiful your hair is.”
“Oh well.”
“You have to do me another favor.”
“What?”
“I have to leave this house before Stefano, without even realizing it, kills me
and the child.”
“You’re worrying me.”
“You’re right to be worried, I’m afraid.”
“Tell me what to do.”
“Go to Enzo. Tell him that I tried but I couldn’t make it.”
“I don’t understand.”
“It’s not important for you to understand: you have to go back to Pisa, you
have your things. Tell him this, that’s all: Lina tried but she couldn’t make it.”
She went with me to the door with the child in her arms. She said to her son,
“Rino, say goodbye to Aunt Lenù.”
The baby smiled, waved his hand goodbye.
105.
Before I left I went to see Enzo. When I said to him, “Lina told me to tell you
that  she  tried  but  she  couldn’t  make  it,”  not  even  the  shadow  of  an  emotion
crossed his face, so I thought that the message left him completely indifferent.
“Things are bad,” I added. “On the other hand I don’t really know what can be
done.”  He  pressed  his  lips  together,  assumed  a  grave  expression.  We  said
goodbye.
On the train I opened the metal box, even though I had sworn not to. There
were eight notebooks. From the first lines I began to feel bad. In Pisa, the bad
feeling increased, over days, over months. Every word of Lila’s diminished me.
Every sentence, even sentences written when she was still a child, seemed to
empty out mine, not the ones of that time but the ones now. And yet every
page ignited my thoughts, my ideas, my pages as if until that moment I had
lived in a studious but ineffectual stupor. Those notebooks I memorized, and in
the end they made me feel that the world of the Normale—the friends, male
and female, who respected me, the affectionate looks of those professors who
encouraged me to constantly do more—was part of a universe that was too
protected and thus too predictable, compared with that tempestuous world
that,  in  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  neighborhood,  Lila  had  been  able  to
explore in her hurried lines, on pages that were crumpled and stained. Every
past effort of mine seemed without meaning. I was frightened, for months
school went badly. I was alone, Franco Mari had lost his place at the Normale, I
couldn’t pull myself out of the feeling of pettiness that had overwhelmed me.
At a certain point it became clear that soon I, too, would get a bad mark and be
sent home. So one evening in late autumn, without a precise plan, I went out
carrying the metal box. I stopped on the Solferino bridge and threw it into the
Arno.
106.
During my last year in Pisa the perspective from which I had experienced
the first three changed. I was possessed by an ungrateful dislike of the city, my
classmates, the teachers, the exams, the frigid days, the political meetings on
warm evenings near the Baptistery, the films at the film forum, the entire
unchanging urban space: the Timpano, the Lungarno Pacinotti, Via XXIV May,
Via San Frediano, Piazza dei Cavalieri, Via Consoli del Mare, Via San Lorenzo,
routes that were the same and yet alien even when the baker said hello and the
newspaper seller chatted about the weather, alien in the voices that I had
nevertheless forced myself to imitate from the start, alien in the color of the
stone and the plants and the signs and the clouds or sky.
I  don’t  know  if  it  was  because  of  Lila’s  notebooks.  Certainly,  right  after
reading them and long before throwing away the box that contained them, I
became disenchanted. My first impression, that of finding myself part of a
fearless battle, passed. The trepidation at every exam and the joy of passing it
with the highest marks had faded. Gone was the pleasure of re-educating my
voice, my gestures, my way of dressing and walking, as if I were competing for
the prize of best disguise, the mask worn so well that it was almost a face.
Suddenly I was aware of that almost. Had I made it? Almost. Had I torn myself
away from Naples, the neighborhood? Almost. Did I have new friends, male and
female, who came from cultured backgrounds, often more cultured than the
one that Professor Galiani and her children belonged to? Almost. From one
exam to the next, had I become a student who was well received by the solemn
professors who questioned me? Almost. Behind the almost I seemed to see how
things stood. I was afraid. I was afraid as I had been the day I arrived in Pisa. I
was scared of anyone who had that culture without the almost, with casual
confidence.
There were many people at the Normale who did. It wasn’t just students who
passed the exams brilliantly, in Latin or Greek or history. They were youths—
almost all male, as were the outstanding professors and the illustrious names
who had passed through that institution—who excelled because they knew,
without apparent effort, the present and future use of the labor of studying.
They knew because of the families they came from or through an instinctive
orientation. They knew how a newspaper or a journal was put together, how a
publishing house was organized, what a radio or television office was, how a
film originates, what the university hierarchies were, what there was beyond
the borders of our towns or cities, beyond the Alps, beyond the sea. They knew
the names of the people who counted, the people to be admired and those to
be despised. I, on the other hand, knew nothing, to me anyone whose name
was printed in a newspaper or a book was a god. If someone said to me with
admiration or with resentment: that’s so-and-so, that’s the son of so-and-so,
that’s  that  other  so-and-so’s  granddaughter,  I  was  silent  or  I  pretended  to
know. I perceived, of course, that they were truly important names, and yet I
had never heard them, I didn’t know what they had done that was important, I
didn’t know the map of prestige. For example, I came to my exams very well
prepared, but if the professor were suddenly to ask me, “Do you know from
what works I derive the authority on the basis of which I teach this subject in
this university?” I wouldn’t know what to answer. But the others knew. So I
moved among them fearful of saying and doing the wrong things.
When Franco Mari fell in love with me, that fear diminished. He instructed
me,  I  learned  to  move  in  his  wake.  Franco  was  lively,  attentive  to  others,
insolent, bold. He felt so sure of having read the right books and thus of being
right that he always spoke with authority. I had learned to express myself in
private  and,  more  rarely,  in  public,  relying  on  his  reputation.  And  I  was
successful, or at least was becoming so. Strengthened by his certainties, I was
at times bolder than he, at times more effective. But, although I had made a lot
of progress, I still worried that I wasn’t up to it, that I would say the wrong
thing, reveal how ignorant and inexperienced I was in precisely the things that
everyone knew. And as soon as Franco, in spite of himself, went out of my life,
the fear regained power. I had had the proof of what, deep down, I already
knew.  His  wealth,  his  upbringing,  his  reputation,  well  known  among  the
students, as a young militant on the left, his sociability, even his courage when
he delivered carefully measured speeches against powerful people within and
outside  the  university—all  this  had  given  him  an  aura  that  automatically
extended to me, as his fiancée or girlfriend or companion, as if the pure and
simple fact that he loved me were the public sanctioning of my talents. But as
soon as he lost his place at the Normale his merits faded, and no longer shone
on me. The students from good families stopped inviting me to Sunday outings
and parties. Some began making fun of my Neapolitan accent again. The things
he  had  given  me  were  no  longer  in  fashion,  looked  dated.  I  had  quickly
understood that Franco, his presence in my life, had masked my true condition
but hadn’t changed it, I hadn’t really succeeded in fitting in. I was one of those
who  labored  day  and  night,  got  excellent  results,  were  even  treated  with
congeniality and respect, but would never carry off with the proper manner
the high level of those studies. I would always be afraid: afraid of saying the
wrong thing, of using an exaggerated tone, of dressing unsuitably, of revealing
petty feelings, of not having interesting thoughts.
107.
I  have  to  say  that  it  was  a  depressing  period  for  other  reasons  as  well.
Everyone knew, in Piazza dei Cavalieri, that I went to Franco’s room at night,
that I had gone alone with him to Paris, to Versilia, and this had given me the
reputation of an easy girl. It’s complicated to explain what it cost me to adapt
to the idea of sexual freedom that Franco ardently supported; I myself hid the
difficulty to seem free and open-minded to him. Nor could I repeat in public
the ideas that he had instilled in me as if they were gospel, that is to say that
half virgins were the worst kind of woman, petit bourgeois who preferred to
give you their ass than to do things properly. And I couldn’t say that I had a
friend, in Naples, who at sixteen was already married, who at eighteen had
taken a lover, who had become pregnant by him, who had returned to her
husband, who would do God knows what else—that, in other words, going to
bed with Franco seemed to me a small thing, compared with Lila’s turbulent
affairs. I had had to put up with malicious remarks from the girls, crude ones
from the boys, their persistent looks at my large bosom. I had had to reject
bluntly the bluntness with which some offered to replace my former boyfriend.
I had to resign myself to the fact that the youths responded to my rejections
with vulgar remarks. I kept on with clenched teeth, I said to myself: it will end.
Then, one afternoon, as I was leaving a crowded café on Via San Frediano
with two girlfriends, one of my rejected suitors shouted at me, seriously, in
front of everyone, “Hey, Naples, remember to bring me the blue sweater I left
in your room.” Laughter, I went out without responding. But I soon realized
that I was being followed by a boy I had already noticed in classes because of
his peculiar appearance. He was neither a shadowy young intellectual like Nino
nor an easygoing youth like Franco. He wore glasses, was very shy, solitary,
with  a  tangled  mass  of  black  hair,  a  clearly  solid  body,  crooked  feet.  He
followed me to the college, then finally he called to me: “Greco.”
Whoever he was, he knew my surname. I stopped out of politeness. The
young  man  introduced  himself,  Pietro  Airota,  and  made  an  embarrassed,
confused speech. He said that he was ashamed of his companions but that he
also hated himself because he had been cowardly and hadn’t intervened.
“Intervened to do what?” I asked sarcastically, but at the same time amazed
that someone like him, stooping, with thick glasses, that ridiculous hair, and
the aura, the language of someone who is always at his books, felt it his duty to
be the knight in shining armor like the boys of the neighborhood.
“To defend your good name.”
“I don’t have a good name.”
He  stammered  something  that  seemed  to  me  a  mixture  of  apology  and
goodbye, and went off.
The next day I looked for him, I began to sit next to him in classes, we took
long walks together. He surprised me: he had already begun to work on his
thesis, for example, and like me he was doing it in Latin literature; unlike me,
he didn’t say “thesis,” he said “work”; and once or twice he said “book,” a book
that he was finishing and that he would publish right after graduating. Work,
book? What was he saying? Although he was twenty-two he had a thoughtful
tone, he resorted continuously to the most refined quotations, he acted as if he
already had a position at the Normale or some other university.
“Will you really publish your thesis?” I asked once, in disbelief.
He looked at me with equal amazement: “If it’s good, yes.”
“Are all theses that come out well published?”
“Why not.”
He was studying Bacchic rites, I the fourth book of the Aeneid. I said, “Maybe
Bacchus is more interesting than Dido.”
“Everything is interesting if you know how to work on it.”
We never talked about everyday things, or the possibility that the U.S.A.
would give nuclear arms to West Germany, or whether Fellini was better than
Antonioni, as Franco had accustomed me to do, but only about Latin literature,
Greek literature. Pietro had a prodigious memory: he knew how to connect
texts that were very unlike one another and he quoted them as if he were
looking at them, but without being pedantic, without pretension, as if it were
the most natural thing between two people who were devoted to their studies.
The more time I spent with him, the more I realized that he was really smart,
smart in a way that I would never be, because where I was cautious only out of
fear  of  making  a  mistake,  he  demonstrated  a  sort  of  easy  inclination  to
deliberate thought, to assertions that were never rash.
Even after I’d been walking with him a couple of times on Corso Italia or
between the Duomo and the Camposanto, I saw that things around me changed
again. One morning a girl I knew said to me, with friendly resentment, “What
do you do to men? Now you’ve conquered the son of Airota.”
I didn’t know who Airota the father was, but certainly my classmates became
respectful again: I was invited to parties or dinner. At a certain point I even
had the suspicion that they talked to me because I brought Pietro out with me,
since  he  generally  kept  to  himself,  absorbed  in  his  work.  I  began  to  ask
questions, all directed toward finding out what the merits of my new friend’s
father were. I discovered that he taught Greek literature at the university in
Genoa but was also a prominent figure in the socialist party. This information
constrained me, I was afraid of saying or having said in Pietro’s presence things
that were naïve or wrong. While he went on talking to me about his thesis-
book, I, fearful of saying something stupid, talked less about mine.
One Sunday he arrived at the college out of breath, he wanted me to have
lunch with his family, father, mother, and sister, who had come to see him. I
was immediately apprehensive, I dressed up as well as I could. I thought: I’ll
make  a  mistake  with  subjunctives,  they’ll  find  me  clumsy,  they’re  grand
people, they’ll have a big car and a driver, what will I say, I’ll look like an idiot.
But as soon as I saw them I relaxed. Professor Airota was a man of medium
height in a rather rumpled gray suit, he had a broad face that showed signs of
weariness,  large  eyeglasses:  when  he  took  off  his  hat  I  saw  that  he  was
completely bald. Adele, his wife, was a thin woman, not pretty but refined,
elegant without pretension. The car was like the Solaras’ Fiat 1100, before they
bought the Giulietta, and, I discovered, it was not a chauffeur who drove it
from Genoa to Pisa but Mariarosa, Pietro’s sister, who was attractive, with
intelligent eyes, and who immediately hugged and kissed me as if we had been
friends for a long time.
“Do you always drive here from Genoa?” I asked.
“Yes, I like driving.”
“Was it hard to get a license?”
“Not at all.”
She  was  twenty-four  and  was  working  for  a  professor  in  the  art-history
department at the University of Milan, she was studying Piero della Francesca.
She  knew  everything  about  me,  that  is,  everything  her  brother  knew,  my
scholarly interests and that was all. Professor Airota and his wife knew the
same things.
I spent a wonderful morning with them; they put me at my ease. Unlike
Pietro, his father, mother, and sister conversed on a wide variety of subjects. At
lunch, in the restaurant of the hotel where they were staying, Professor Airota
and his daughter had, for example, affectionate skirmishes on political subjects
that  I  had  heard  about  from  Pasquale,  from  Nino,  and  from  Franco  but  of
whose substance I knew almost nothing. Arguments like: you’ve been trapped
by inter-class collaboration; you call it a trap, I call it mediation; mediation in
which the Christian Democrats always and only win; the politics of the center
left is difficult; if it’s difficult, go back to being socialists; you’re not reforming
a thing; in our place what would you do; revolution, revolution, and revolution;
revolution is taking Italy out of the Middle Ages, without us socialists in the
government, the students who talk about sex in school would be in jail and so
would those who distribute pacifist leaflets; I want to see how you’d manage
with  the  Atlantic  Pact;  we  were  always  against  the  war  and  against  all
imperialism; you govern with the Christian Democrats, but will you stay anti-
American?
Like  that,  a  swift  back  and  forth:  a  polemical  exercise  that  they  both
obviously enjoyed, maybe a friendly habit of long standing. I recognized in
them, father and daughter, what I had never had and, I now knew, would
always lack. What was it? I wasn’t able to say precisely: the training, perhaps,
to  feel  that  the  questions  of  the  world  were  deeply  connected  to  me;  the
capacity to feel them as crucial and not purely as information to display at an
exam,  in  view  of  a  good  grade;  a  mental  conformation  that  didn’t  reduce
everything  to  my  own  individual  battle,  to  the  effort  to  be  successful.
Mariarosa  was  kind,  and  so  was  her  father;  their  tones  were  controlled,
without a trace of the verbal excesses of Armando, Professor Galiani’s son, or of
Nino;  and  yet  they  injected  warmth  into  political  formulas  that  on  other
occasions had seemed to me cold, remote, to be used only in an attempt not to
make a bad impression. Following each other in rapid succession, they moved
on, without interruption, to the bombing of North Vietnam, to the student
revolts on various campuses, to the many breeding grounds of anti-imperialist
struggle in Latin America and Africa. And the daughter now seemed to be more
up to date than the father. How many things Mariarosa knew, she talked as if
she had first-hand information, so that Airota at a certain point looked at his
wife ironically, and Adele said to her, “You’re the only one who hasn’t chosen a
dessert yet.”
“I’ll have chocolate cake,” she said, breaking off with a graceful frown.
I looked at her in admiration. She drove a car, lived in Milan, taught at the
university,  stood  up  to  her  father  without  resentment.  I,  instead:  I  was
frightened by the idea of opening my mouth, and, at the same time, humiliated
by  staying  silent.  I  couldn’t  contain  myself,  I  said  hyperbolically,  “The
Americans, after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, should be brought to trial for crimes
against humanity.”
Silence. The whole family looked at me. Mariarosa exclaimed Bravo!, she
took my hand, shook it. I felt encouraged and immediately bubbled over with
words,  scraps  of  old  phrases  memorized  at  various  times.  I  talked  about
planning  and  rationalization,  the  socialist-Christian  Democratic  precipice,
about  neocapitalism,  about  organizational  structures,  about  Africa,  Asia,
primary school, Piaget, collusion of the police and the courts, fascist rot in
every  manifestation  of  the  state.  I  was  muddled,  breathless.  My  heart  was
pounding, I forgot who I was with and where I was. Yet I felt around me an
atmosphere of increasing approval, and I was happy to have expressed myself,
I seemed to have made a good impression. I was also glad that no one in that
nice little family had asked me, as happened frequently, where I came from,
what my father did, and my mother. I was I, I, I.
I stayed with them, talking, in the afternoon, too. And in the evening we all
went for a walk, before going to dinner. At every step Professor Airota met
people  he  knew.  Even  two  of  the  university  professors,  with  their  wives,
stopped to greet him warmly.
108.
But already the next day I felt bad. The time spent with Pietro’s family had
given me further proof that the hard work of the Normale was a mistake. Merit
was not enough, something else was required, and I didn’t have it nor did I
know how to learn it. How embarrassing that jumble of agitated words was,
without  logical  rigor,  without  composure,  without  irony,  things  that
Mariarosa,  Adele,  Pietro  were  capable  of.  I  had  learned  the  methodical
persistence of the researcher who checks even the commas, that, yes, and I
proved it during exams, or with the thesis that I was writing. But in fact I
remained naïve, even if almost too cultured, I didn’t have the armor to advance
serenely as they did. Professor Airota was an immortal god who had given his
children  magical  weapons  before  the  battle.  Mariarosa  was  invincible.  And
Pietro perfect in his overcultivated courtesy. I? I could only remain near them,
shine in their radiance.
Anxiety not to lose Pietro seized me. I sought him out, I clung to him, I was
affectionate. But I waited in vain for him to declare himself. One night I kissed
him, on the cheek, and finally he kissed me on the mouth. We began to meet in
secluded places, at night, waiting for darkness. I touched him, he touched me,
he didn’t want to penetrate me. It was as if I had returned to the time of
Antonio, and yet the difference was enormous. There was the excitement of
going out in the evening with Airota’s son, getting strength from him. Every so
often I thought of calling Lila from a public telephone: I wanted to tell her that
I had this new boyfriend and that almost certainly our graduation theses would
be published, they would become books, just like real books, with the cover,
the title, the name. I wanted to tell her it was possible that both he and I would
teach in the university, his sister Mariarosa at twenty-four was already doing
so. I also wanted to tell her: you’re right, Lila, if they teach you properly from
childhood, as an adult you have less trouble with everything, you are someone
who seems to have been born already knowing. But in the end I gave it up.
Why telephone her? To listen silently to her story? Or, if she let me speak,
what would I tell her? I knew very well that what would surely happen to
Pietro would never happen to me. Most important, I knew that, like Franco, he
would soon disappear, and that after all it was better that way, because I didn’t
love him, I was with him in the dark alleys, in the meadows, only so that I
would feel the fear less.
109.
Around  Christmas  vacation  in  1966  I  got  a  very  bad  flu.  I  telephoned  a
neighbor of my parents—finally even in the old neighborhood many people
had a telephone—and told them I wasn’t coming home for the vacation. Then I
sank  into  desolate  days  of  fever  and  coughing,  while  the  college  emptied,
became silent. I ate nothing, I even had trouble drinking. One morning when I
had fallen into an exhausted half-sleep, I heard loud voices, in my dialect, as
when in the neighborhood the women leaned out the windows, arguing. From
the darkest depths of my mind came the known footsteps of my mother. She
didn’t knock, she opened the door, she entered, loaded down with bags.
It was unimaginable. She had hardly ever left the neighborhood, at most to
go to the center of the city. Outside of Naples, as far as I knew, she had never
been. And yet she had got on the train, had traveled all night, and had come to
my room to heap on me Christmas food that she had prepared ahead of time,
quarrelsome gossip in a loud voice, orders that were supposed, as if by magic,
to bring me back to health and allow me to leave with her in the evening:
because she had to go, at home she had other children and my father.
She depleted me more than the fever. She shouted so much, moving objects,
carelessly rearranging things, that I was afraid the dean would come. At one
point I felt I was fainting, I closed my eyes, hoping she wouldn’t follow me into
the  nauseating  darkness  I  was  being  dragged  into.  But  she  didn’t  stop  at
anything. Always in motion through the room, helpful and aggressive, she told
me about my father, my siblings, the neighbors, friends, and, naturally, about
Carmen, Ada, Gigliola, Lila.
I tried not to listen but she pursued me: Do you understand what she did, do you
understand what happened? And she shook me, touching an arm or a foot buried
under  the  covers.  I  discovered  that,  in  the  state  of  fragility  caused  by  the
illness, I was more sensitive to everything I couldn’t stand about her. I got
angry—and  I  told  her  this—at  how,  with  every  word,  she  wanted  to
demonstrate that all my contemporaries, compared to me, had failed. “Stop it,”
I muttered. She paid no attention, she kept repeating, You, on the other hand.
But what wounded me most was to sense behind her pride as a mother the
fear  that  things  would  suddenly  change  and  I  would  again  lose  points,  no
longer give her occasion to boast. She did not much trust the stability of the
world. So she force-fed me, dried the sweat, made me take my temperature I
don’t know how many times. Was she afraid I would die, depriving her of my
trophy existence? Was she afraid that, being ill, I would give in, be in some way
demoted, have to return home without glory? She spoke obsessively about Lila.
She was so insistent that I suddenly perceived how highly she had regarded
her since she was a child. Even she, I thought, even my mother, realized that
Lila is better than me and now she is surprised that I’ve left her behind, she
believes and doesn’t believe it, she’s afraid of losing her position as luckiest
mother in the neighborhood. Look how combative she is, look at the arrogance in
her eyes. I felt the energy she gave off, and I thought that her lameness had
required  her  to  have  greater  strength  than  normal,  in  order  to  survive,
imposing on her the ferocity with which she moved inside and outside the
family. What, on the other hand, was my father? A weak little man, trained to
be obliging, to hold out his hand discreetly to pocket small tips: certainly he
would never have managed to overcome all the obstacles and arrive at this
austere building. She had done it.
When she left and the silence returned, on the one hand I felt relieved, on
the other, because of the fever, I was moved. I thought of her alone, asking
every passerby if this was the right direction for the train station, her, walking,
with her lame leg, in an unknown city. She would never spend the money for a
bus, she was careful not to waste even five lire. But she would make it: she
would buy the right ticket and take the right trains, traveling overnight on the
uncomfortable  seats,  or  even  standing,  all  the  way  to  Naples.  There,  after
another long walk, she would arrive in the neighborhood, and start polishing
and cooking, she would cut up the eel, and prepare the insalata di rinforzo, and
the chicken broth, and the struffoli, without resting for a moment, filled with
rage, but consoling herself by saying, in some part of her brain, “Lenuccia is
better than Gigliola, than Carmen, than Ada, than Lina, than all of them.”
110.
It was because of Gigliola, according to my mother, that Lila’s situation had
become even more intolerable. Everything began on a Sunday in April when
the daughter of Spagnuolo the pastry maker invited Ada to the parish cinema.
The following evening, after the stores closed, she again went to her and said,
“What are you doing all alone? Come watch television at my parents’ house
and bring along Melina.” One thing led to another, and she ended up dragging
her along on evening outings with Michele Solara, her boyfriend. Five of them
often  went  to  the  pizzeria:  Gigliola,  her  younger  brother,  Michele,  Ada,
Antonio. The pizzeria was in the center, at Santa Lucia. Michele drove, Gigliola
sat beside him, all dressed up, and in the back seat were Lello, Antonio, and
Ada.
Antonio didn’t like spending his free time with his boss, and at first he tried
to tell Ada that he was busy. But when Gigliola reported that Michele was
angry that he didn’t show up, he sank his head between his shoulders and
obeyed. The conversation was almost always between the two girls; Michele
and Antonio didn’t exchange a word, in fact Solara often left the table and
went to talk to the owner of the pizzeria, with whom he had various dealings.
Gigliola’s brother ate pizza and was quietly bored.
The girls’ preferred subject was the love between Ada and Stefano. They
talked  about  the  presents  he  had  given  her  and  was  gaving  her,  of  the
wonderful trip to Stockholm in August the year before (how many lies Ada had
had to tell poor Pasquale), how in the grocery he treated her better than if she
had been the owner. Ada softened, she talked and talked. Gigliola listened and
every so often said things like “The Church, if you want, can annul a marriage.”
Ada interrupted, scowling, “I know, but it’s difficult.”
“Difficult, not impossible. You have to go to the Sacra Rota.”
“What’s that?”
“I don’t know exactly, but the Sacra Rota can wipe out everything.”
“You’re sure?”
“I read it.”
Ada was very happy about that unexpected friendship. She had been living
her story in silence, among many fears and much remorse. Now she discovered
that talking about it did her good, proved she was right, erased her guilt. The
only thing that spoiled her relief was her brother’s hostility, and in fact when
they  got  home  all  they  did  was  quarrel.  Once  Antonio  nearly  hit  her,  he
shouted at her, “Why the fuck do you tell your business to everybody? Do you
realize you look like a whore and I’m the pimp?”
She said in the most antagonistic tone she was capable of: “You know why
Michele Solara comes to dinner with us?”
“Because he’s my boss.”
“Oh yes, sure.”
“Then why?”
“Because I’m with Stefano, who’s important. If I waited for you, the daughter
of Melina I would be and the daughter of Melina I would remain.”
Antonio  lost  control,  he  said:  “You’re  not  with  Stefano,  you’re  Stefano’s
whore.”
Ada burst into tears. “It’s not true, Stefano loves only me.”
One night things got even worse. They were at home, dinner was over. Ada
was  doing  the  dishes,  Antonio  was  staring  into  space,  their  mother  was
humming an old song while she swept the floor too energetically. At some
point Melina accidentally swept the broom over her daughter’s feet. It was
terrible. There was at the time a superstition—I don’t know if it still exists—
that if you sweep the broom over the feet of an unmarried girl she’ll never get
married. Ada saw her future in a flash. She leaped back as if she had been
touched by a cockroach and the plate she was holding fell to the floor.
“You swept over my feet,” she shrieked, leaving her mother astonished.
“She didn’t do it on purpose,” Antonio said.
“She did do it on purpose. You don’t want me to get married, it’s too useful
for you to have me work for you, you want to keep me here my whole life.”
Melina tried to embrace her daughter, saying no no, but Ada repulsed her
rudely, so that she retreated, bumped into a chair, and fell on the floor amid
the fragments of the broken plate.
Antonio rushed to help his mother, but Melina now was screaming in fear,
fear of her son, of her daughter, of the things around her. And Ada screamed
louder in return, saying, “I’ll show you who I’m going to marry, and soon,
because if Lina doesn’t get out of the way by herself, I’ll get her out, and off the
face of the earth.”
Antonio left the house, slamming the door. More desperate than usual, in
the following days he tried to escape from that new tragedy in his life, he made
an effort to be deaf and dumb, he avoided going past the old grocery, and if by
chance he ran into Stefano Carracci he looked in another direction before the
wish to beat him up overpowered him. His mind was troubled, he couldn’t
understand what was right and what wasn’t. Had it been right not to hand Lila
over to Michele? Had it been right to tell Enzo to take her home? If Lila hadn’t
returned to her husband, would his sister’s situation be different? Everything
happens by chance, he reasoned, without good and without ill. But at that
point his brain got stuck and on the first occasion, as if to free himself from
bad dreams, he went back to quarreling with Ada. He shouted at her, “He is a
married man, bitch: he has a small child, you are worse than our mother, you
don’t have any sense of things.” Ada then went to Gigliola, confided to her:
“My brother is crazy, my brother wants to kill me.”
So it was that one afternoon Michele called Antonio and sent him to do a
long-term job in Germany. He didn’t object, in fact he obeyed willingly, he left
without saying goodbye to his sister or even to Melina. He took it for granted
that in a foreign country, among people who spoke like the Nazis at the church
cinema, he would be stabbed, or shot, and he was content. He considered it
more tolerable to be murdered than to continue to observe the suffering of his
mother and Ada without being able to do anything.
The only person he wanted to see before setting off on the train was Enzo.
He found him busy: at the time he was trying to sell everything, the mule, the
cart, his mother’s little shop, a garden near the railroad. He wanted to give part
of the proceeds to a maiden aunt who had offered to take care of his siblings.
“And you?” Antonio asked.
“I’m looking for a job.”
“You want to change your life?”
“Yes.”
“It’s a good thing.”
“It’s a necessity.”
“I, on the other hand, am what I am.”
“Nonsense.”
“It’s true, but it’s all right. Now I have to leave and I don’t know when I’ll be
back. Every so often, please, could you cast an eye on my mother, my sister,
and the children?”
“If I stay in the neighborhood, yes.”
“We were wrong, Enzù, we shouldn’t have taken Lina home.”
“Maybe.”
“It’s all a mess, you never know what to do.”
“Yes.”
“Bye.”
“Bye.”
They didn’t even shake hands. Antonio went to Piazza Garibaldi and got the
train. He had a long, difficult journey, night and day, with many angry voices
running through his veins. He felt extremely tired after just a few hours, his
feet were tingling; he hadn’t traveled since he returned from military service.
Every so often he got out to get a drink of water from a fountain, but he was
afraid the train would leave. Later he told me that at the station in Florence he
felt so depressed that he thought: I’ll stop here and go to Lenuccia.
111.
With the departure of Antonio the bond between Gigliola and Ada became
very tight. Gigliola suggested to her what the daughter of Melina had had in
mind  for  some  time,  that  is,  that  she  shouldn’t  wait  any  longer,  the
matrimonial situation of Stefano should be resolved. “Lina has to get out of
that  house,”  she  said,  “and  you  have  to  go  in:  if  you  wait  too  long,  the
enchantment will be broken and you’ll lose everything, even the job in the
grocery, because she’ll regain ground and force Stefano to get rid of you.”
Gigliola went so far as to confide to her that she was speaking from experience,
she had the same problem with Michele. “If I wait for him to make up his mind
to marry me,” she whispered, “I’ll get old; so I’m tormenting him: either we
marry by the spring of 1968 or I’m leaving and fuck him.”
Thus Ada went on to envelop Stefano in a net of true, sticky desire that made
him feel special, and meanwhile she murmured between kisses, “You have to
decide, Ste’, either me or her; I’m not saying you have to throw her out in the
street with the child, that’s your son, you have responsibilities; but do what
lots of actors and important people do today: give her some money and that’s
it. Everybody in the neighborhood knows that I’m your real wife, so I want to
stay with you, always.”
Stefano said yes and hugged her tight in the uncomfortable narrow bed on
the Rettifilo, but then he didn’t do much, except return home to Lila and yell,
because  there  were  no  clean  socks,  or  because  he  had  seen  her  talking  to
Pasquale or someone else.
At  that  point  Ada  began  to  despair.  One  Sunday  morning  she  ran  into
Carmen, who spoke to her in accusatory tones of the working conditions in the
two groceries. One thing led to another, they began to talk venomously about
Lila, whom both of them, for different reasons, considered the origin of their
troubles.  Finally  Ada  couldn’t  resist  and  recounted  her  romantic  situation,
forgetting that Carmen was the sister of her former fiancé. And Carmen, who
couldn’t  wait  to  be  part  of  the  network  of  gossip,  listened  willingly,  often
interrupted to fan the flames, tried with her advice to do as much damage to
Ada, who had betrayed Pasquale, and to Lila, who had betrayed her. But, I
should  say,  apart  from  the  resentments,  there  was  the  pleasure  of  having
something to do with a person, her childhood friend, who found herself in the
role of lover of a married man. And although since childhood we girls of the
neighborhood had wanted to become wives, growing up we had almost always
sympathized with the lovers, who seemed to us more spirited, more combative,
and, especially, more modern. On the other hand we hoped that the legitimate
wife would get gravely ill and die (in general she was a very wicked or at least
unfaithful woman), and that the lover would stop being a lover and crown her
dream  of  love  by  becoming  a  wife.  We  were,  in  short,  on  the  side  of  the
violation,  but  only  because  it  reaffirmed  the  value  of  the  rule.  As  a  result
Carmen, although amid much devious advice, ended up by passionately taking
Ada’s  side,  her  feelings  were  genuine,  and  one  day  she  said  to  her,  in  all
honesty: “You can’t go on like this, you have to get rid of that bitch, marry
Stefano, give him your own children. Ask the Solaras if they know anyone in
the Sacra Rota.”
Ada immediately added Carmen’s suggestions to Gigliola’s and one night, in
the pizzeria, she turned directly to Michele: “Can you get to this Sacra Rota?”
He answered ironically, “I don’t know, I can ask, one always finds a friend.
But just take what’s yours, that’s the most urgent thing. And don’t worry about
anything: if someone gives you trouble, send him to me.”
Michele’s words were very important, Ada felt supported, never in her life
had she felt so surrounded by approval. Yet Gigliola’s hammering, Carmen’s
advice, that unexpected promise of protection on the part of an important
male authority, and even her anger at the fact that in August Stefano wouldn’t
take a trip abroad as he had the year before but had only gone to the Sea
Garden a few times, were not enough to push her to attack. It took a true,
concrete new fact: the discovery that she was pregnant.
The pregnancy made Ada furiously happy, but she kept the news to herself,
she didn’t speak of it even to Stefano. One afternoon she took off her smock,
left the grocery as if to go out for some fresh air, and instead went to Lila’s
house.
“Did something happen?” Signora Carracci asked in bewilderment as she
opened the door.
Ada answered, “Nothing has happened that you don’t already know.”
She came in and told her everything, in the presence of the child. She began
calmly, she talked about actors and also cyclists, she called herself a kind of
“white  lady”—like  the  lover  of  the  famous  cyclist  Fausto  Coppi—but  more
modern,  and  she  mentioned  the  Sacra  Rota  to  demonstrate  that  even  the
Church and God in certain cases where love is very strong would dissolve a
marriage. Since Lila listened without interrupting, something that Ada would
never have expected—rather, she hoped that she would say just half a word, so
that she could beat her bloody—she got nervous and began to walk around the
apartment, first to demonstrate that she had been in the house often and knew
it well, and, second, to reproach her: “Look at this mess, dirty dishes, the dust,
socks and underwear on the floor, it’s not possible that that poor man has to
live like this.” Finally, in an uncontrollable frenzy, she began to pick the dirty
clothes up off the bedroom floor, shrieking, “Starting tomorrow I’m coming
here to tidy up. You don’t even know how to make the bed, look here, Stefano
can’t bear the sheet to be folded like this, he told me he’s explained it to you a
thousand times and you pay no attention.”
Here she stopped suddenly, confused, and said in a low voice, “You have to
go, Lina, because if you don’t I’ll kill the child.”
Lila managed to respond only, “You’re behaving like your mother, Ada.”
Those  were  the  words.  I  imagine  her  voice  now:  she  wasn’t  capable  of
emotional  tones,  she  must  have  spoken  as  usual  with  cold  malice,  or  with
detachment. And yet years later she told me that, seeing Ada in the house in
that state, she had remembered the cries of Melina, the abandoned lover, when
the Sarratore family left the neighborhood, and she had seen again the iron
that flew out the window and almost killed Nino. The long flame of suffering,
which then had much impressed her, was flickering again in Ada; only now it
wasn’t the wife of Sarratore feeding it but her, Lila. A cruel game of mirrors
that at the time escaped us all. But not her, and so it’s likely that instead of
resentment, instead of her usual determination to do harm, bitterness was
triggered in her, and pity. Certainly she tried to take her hand, she said, “Sit
down, I’ll make you a cup of chamomile tea.”
But Ada, in all Lila’s words, from first to last, and above all in that gesture,
saw an insult. She withdrew abruptly, she rolled her eyes in a striking way,
showing the white, and when the pupils reappeared she shouted, “Are you
saying that I’m mad? That I’m mad like my mother? Then you had better pay
attention,  Lina.  Don’t  touch  me,  get  out  of  the  way,  make  yourself  a
chamomile. I’m going to clean up this disgusting house.”
She swept, she washed the floors, she remade the bed, and she didn’t say
another word.
Lila followed her with her gaze, afraid that she would break, like an artificial
body subjected to excessive acceleration. Then she took the child and went
out,  she  walked  around  the  new  neighborhood  for  a  long  time,  talking  to
Rinuccio, pointing out things, naming them, inventing stories. But she did it
more to keep her anguish under control than to entertain the child. She went
back to the house only when, from a distance, she saw Ada go out the front
door and hurry off as if she were late.
112.
When Ada returned to work, out of breath and extremely agitated, Stefano,
menacing but calm, asked her, “Where have you been?” She answered, in the
presence of the customers waiting to be served, “To clean up your house, it was
disgusting.” And addressing the audience on the other side of the counter:
“There was so much dust on the night table you could write in it.”
Stefano said nothing, disappointing the customers. When the shop emptied
and it was time to close, Ada cleaned, swept, always watching her lover out of
the corner of her eye. Nothing happened, he did the accounts sitting at the
cash register, smoking heavily aromatic American cigarettes. Once the last butt
was out, he grabbed the handle to lower the shutter, but he lowered it from the
inside.
“What are you doing?” Ada asked, alarmed.
“We’ll go out on the courtyard side.”
After that, he struck her in the face so many times, first with the palm of his
hand, then the back, that she leaned against the counter in order not to faint.
“How dare you go to my house?” he said in a voice strangled by the will not to
scream. “How dare you disturb my wife and my son?” Finally he realized that
his heart was nearly bursting and he tried to calm down. It was the first time
he had hit her. He stammered, trembling, “Don’t ever do it again.” And he went
out, leaving her bleeding in the shop.
The next day Ada didn’t go to work. Battered as she was, she appeared at
Lila’s house, and Lila, when she saw the bruises on her face, told her to come
in.
“Make me the chamomile,” said Melina’s daughter.
Lila made it for her.
“The baby is cute.”
“Yes.”
“Just like Stefano.”
“No.”
“He has the same eyes and the same mouth.”
“No.”
“If you have to read your books, go ahead, I’ll take care of the house and
Rinuccio.”
Lila stared at her, this time almost amused, then she said, “Do what you like,
but don’t go near the baby.”
“Don’t worry, I won’t do anything to him.”
Ada set to work: she straightened, washed the clothes, hung them in the sun,
cooked lunch, prepared dinner. At one point she stopped, charmed by the way
Lila was playing with Rinuccio.
“How old is he?”
“Two years and four months.”
“He’s little, you push him too much.”
“No, he does what he can do.”
“I’m pregnant.”
“What?”
“It’s true.”
“With Stefano?”
“Of course.”
“Does he know?”
“No.”
Lila then understood that her marriage really was almost over, but, as usual
when  she  became  aware  that  change  was  imminent,  she  felt  neither
resentment nor anguish nor worry. When Stefano arrived, he found his wife
reading  in  the  living  room,  Ada  playing  with  the  baby  in  the  kitchen,  the
apartment full of good smells and shining like a large, single precious object.
He realized that the beating had been of no use, he turned white, he couldn’t
breathe.
“Go,” he said to Ada in a low voice.
“No.”
“What’s got into your head?”
“I’m staying here.”
“You want me to go mad?”
“Yes, that makes two of us.”
Lila closed the book, took the baby without saying anything and withdrew
into the room where, a long time earlier, I had studied, and where Rinuccio
now slept. Stefano whispered to his lover, “You’ll ruin me, like this. It’s not
true that you love me, Ada, you want me to lose all my customers, you want to
reduce me to a pauper, and you know that circumstances are already not good.
Please, tell me what you want and I’ll give it to you.”
“I want to be with you always.”
“Yes, but not here.”
“Here.”
“This is my house, there’s Lina, there’s Rinuccio.”
“From now on I’m here, too: I’m pregnant.”
Stefano sat down. In silence he gazed at Ada’s stomach as she stood before
him, as if he were seeing through her dress, her underpants, her skin, as if he
were seeing the baby already formed, a living being, all ready, about to jump
out. Then there was a knock at the door.
It was a waiter from the Bar Solara, a boy of sixteen who had just been hired.
He  told  Stefano  that  Michele  and  Marcello  wanted  to  see  him  right  away.
Stefano roused himself, at that moment he considered the demand a salvation,
given the storm he had in the house. He said to Ada, “Don’t move.” She smiled,
she nodded yes. He went out, got in the Solaras’ car. What a mess I’ve got
myself into, he thought. What should I do? If my father were alive he would
break  my  legs  with  an  iron  bar.  Women,  debts,  Signora  Solara’s  red  book.
Something  hadn’t  worked.  Lina.  She  had  ruined  him.  What  the  fuck  do
Marcello and Michele want, at this hour, so urgently?
They wanted, he discovered, the old grocery. They didn’t say it but they let
him  understand  it.  Marcello  spoke  merely  of  another  loan  that  they  were
willing to give him. But, he said, the Cerullo shoes have to come definitively to
us, we’re finished with that lazy brother-in-law of yours, he’s not reliable. And
we need a guarantee, an activity, a property, you think about it. That said, he
left, he said he had things to do. At that point Stefano was alone with Michele.
They talked for a long time to see if Rino and Fernando’s factory could be
saved, if he could do without what Marcello had called the guarantee.
But Michele shook his head, he said, “We need guarantees, scandals aren’t
good for business.”
“I don’t know what you mean.”
“I know what I mean. Who do you love more, Lina or Ada?”
“It’s none of your business.”
“No, Ste’, when it’s a question of money your business is my business.”
“What can I tell you: we’re men, you know how it works. Lina is my wife, Ada
is another thing.”
“So you love Ada more?”
“Yes.”
“Resolve the situation and then we’ll talk.”
Many very dark days passed before Stefano found a way of getting out of
that chokehold. Quarrels with Ada, quarrels with Lila, work gone to hell, the
old grocery often closed, the neighborhood that watched and committed to
memory and still remembers. The handsome engaged couple. The convertible.
Soraya is going by with the Shah of Persia, Jack and Jackie are going by. Finally
Stefano resigned himself and said to Lila, “I’ve found you a nice place, suitable
for you and Rinuccio.”
“How generous you are.”
“I’ll come twice a week to see the baby.”
“As far as I’m concerned you don’t have to come see him, since he’s not your
son.”
“You’re a bitch, you’re going to make me smash your face.”
“Smash my face when you want, I’ve got a callus there. But you take care of
your child and I’ll take care of mine.”
He fumed, he got angry, he really tried to hit her. Finally he said, “The place
is on the Vomero.”
“Where?”
“I’ll take you tomorrow and show it to you, in Piazza degli Artisti.”
Lila remembered in a flash the proposal Michele Solara had made long ago:
“I’ve bought a house on the Vomero, in Piazza degli Artisti. If you want I’ll drive you
there now, I’ll show it to you, I took it with you in mind. There you can do what you like:
read, write, invent things, sleep, laugh, talk, and be with Rinuccio. I’m interested only in
being able to look at you and listen to you.”
She shook her head in disbelief, she said to her husband, “You really are a
piece of shit.”
113.
Now Lila is barricaded in Rinuccio’s room, thinking what to do. She’ll never
go back to her mother and father’s house: the weight of her life belongs to her,
she doesn’t want to become a child again. She can’t count on her brother: Rino
is beside himself, he’s angry with Pinuccia in order to get revenge on Stefano,
and  has  begun  to  quarrel  also  with  his  mother-in-law,  Maria,  because  he’s
desperate, he has no money and a lot of debts. She can count only on Enzo: she
trusted and trusts him, even though he never showed up and in fact he seems
to have disappeared from the neighborhood. She thinks: he promised that he’ll
get me out of here. But sometimes she hopes he won’t keep his promise, she’s
afraid of making trouble for him. She’s not worried about a possible fight with
Stefano, her husband has now given her up, and then he’s a coward, even if he
has the strength of a wild beast. But she is afraid of Michele Solara. Not today,
not tomorrow, but when I’m not even thinking about it anymore he’ll appear
and if I don’t submit he’ll make me pay, and he’ll make anyone who’s helped
me pay. So it’s better for me to go away without involving anyone. I have to
find a job, anything, enough to earn what I need to feed him and give him a
roof.
Just thinking of her son saps her strength. What ended up in Rinuccio’s
head:  images,  words.  She  worries  about  the  voices  that  reach  him,
unmonitored. I wonder if he heard mine, while I carried him in my womb. I
wonder how it was imprinted in his nervous system. If he felt loved, if he felt
rejected,  was  he  aware  of  my  agitation.  How  does  one  protect  a  child.
Nourishing him. Loving him. Teaching him things. Acting as a filter for every
sensation that might cripple him forever. I’ve lost his real father, who doesn’t
know anything about him and will never love him. Stefano, who isn’t his father
and yet loved him a little, sold us for love of another woman and a more
genuine son. What will happen to this child. Now Rinuccio knows that when I
go into another room he won’t lose me, I am still there. He maneuvers with
objects and fantasies of objects, the outside and the inside. He knows how to
eat  with  a  fork  and  spoon.  He  handles  things  and  forms  them,  transforms
them. From words he has moved on to sentences. In Italian. He no longer says
“he,”  he  says  “I.”  He  recognizes  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  He  puts  them
together so as to write his name. He loves colors. He’s happy. But all this rage.
He has seen me insulted and beaten. He’s seen me break things and shout
insults. In dialect. I can’t stay here any longer.
114.
Lila came cautiously out of the room only when Stefano wasn’t there, when
Ada wasn’t. She made something to eat for Rinuccio, she ate something herself.
She knew that the neighborhood gossiped, that rumors were spreading. One
late afternoon in November the telephone rang.
“I’ll be there in ten minutes.”
She recognized him and without much surprise she answered, “All right.”
Then: “Enzo.”
“Yes.”
“You’re not obliged.”
“I know.”
“The Solaras are involved.”
“I don’t give a fuck about the Solaras.”
He arrived exactly ten minutes later. He came up, she had put her things and
the child’s in two suitcases and had left on the night table in the bedroom all
her jewelry, including her engagement ring and her wedding ring.
“It’s the second time I’ve left,” she said, “but this time I’m not coming back.”
Enzo looked around, he had never been in that house. She pulled him by the
arm. “Stefano might arrive suddenly, sometimes he does that.”
“Where’s the problem?” he answered.
He touched objects that looked expensive to him, a vase for flowers, an
ashtray, the sparkling silver. He leafed through a pad where Lila had written
down what she needed for the baby and for the house. Then he gave her an
inquiring glance, asked her if she was sure of her choice. He said he had found
work in a factory in San Giovanni a Teduccio and had taken an apartment
there, three rooms, the kitchen was a little dark. “But the things Stefano gave
you,” he added, “you won’t have anymore: I can’t give you those.”
He said to her: “Maybe you’re afraid, because you’re not completely sure.”
“I’m sure,” she said, picking up Rinuccio with a gesture of impatience, “and
I’m not afraid of anything. Let’s go.”
He still delayed. He tore a piece of paper off the shopping list and wrote
something. He left the piece of paper on the table.
“What did you write?”
“The address in San Giovanni.”
“Why?”
“We’re not playing hide-and-seek.”
Finally he picked up the suitcases and started down the stairs. Lila locked
the door, left the key in the lock.
115.
I knew nothing about San Giovanni a Teduccio. When they told me that Lila
had gone to live in that place with Enzo, the only thing that came to mind was
the  factory  owned  by  the  family  of  Bruno  Soccavo,  Nino’s  friend,  which
produced sausages, and was in that area. The association of ideas annoyed me.
I hadn’t thought of the summer on Ischia for a long time: and it made me
realize that the happy phase of that vacation had faded, while its unpleasant
side had expanded. I discovered that every sound from that time, every scent
was  repugnant  to  me,  but  what  in  memory,  surprisingly,  seemed  most
insupportable, and caused me long crying spells, was the night at the Maronti
with Donato Sarratore. Only my suffering for what was happening between Lila
and Nino could have driven me to consider it pleasurable. At this distance I
understood that that first experience of penetration, in the dark, on the cold
sand, with that banal man who was the father of the person I loved had been
degrading. I was ashamed of it and that shame was added to other shames, of a
different nature, that I was experiencing.
I was working night and day on my thesis, I harassed Pietro, reading aloud to
him  what  I  had  written.  He  was  kind,  he  shook  his  head,  he  fished  in  his
memory of Virgil and other authors for passages that might be useful to me. I
noted down every word he uttered, I worked hard, but in a bad mood. I went
back and forth between two feelings. I sought help and it humiliated me to ask
for it, I was grateful and at the same time hostile, in particular I hated that he
did his best not to let his generosity weigh on me. What caused me the greatest
anxiety  was  to  find  myself—together  with  him,  before  him,  after  him—
submitting  my  research  to  the  assistant  professor  who  was  following  the
progress of both of us, a man of around forty, earnest, attentive, sometimes
even sociable. I saw that Pietro was treated as if he already had a professorship,
I as a normal brilliant student. Often I decided not to talk to the teacher, out of
rage,  out  of  pride,  out  of  fear  of  having  to  be  aware  of  my  constitutional
inferiority. I have to do better than Pietro, I thought, he knows so many more
things than I do, but he’s gray, he has no imagination. His way of proceeding,
the way that he gently tried to suggest to me, was too cautious. So I undid my
work, I started again, I pursued an idea that seemed to me original. When I
returned to the professor I was listened to, yes, I was praised, but without
seriousness, as if my struggle were only a game well played. I soon grasped that
Pietro Airota had a future and I didn’t.
Then, there was my naiveté. The assistant professor treated me in a friendly
way, one day he said, “You’re a student of great sensitivity. Do you think you’ll
teach, after your degree?”
I thought he meant teach at the university and my heart jumped for joy, my
cheeks turned red. I said that I loved both teaching and research, I said that I
would  like  to  continue  to  work  on  the  fourth  book  of  the  Aeneid.  He
immediately  realized  that  I  had  misunderstood  and  was  embarrassed.  He
strung together some trite phrases on the pleasure of studying for one’s whole
life and suggested a civil-service exam that would take place in the fall, for a
few positions to be won in the teaching institutes.
“We need,” he urged me, his tone rising, “excellent professors who will train
excellent teachers.”
That was it. Shame, shame, shame. This overconfidence that had grown in
me, this ambition to be like Pietro. The only thing I had in common with him
was the small sexual exchanges in the dark. He panted, he rubbed against me,
he asked nothing that I wouldn’t give him spontaneously.
I felt blocked. For a while I couldn’t work on my thesis, I looked at the pages
of the books without seeing the lines of type. I lay in bed staring at the ceiling, I
interrogated myself on what to do. Give up right at the end, return to the
neighborhood. Get my degree, teach in middle school. Professor. Yes. More
than Oliviero. Equal to Galiani. Or maybe not, maybe a little less. Professor
Greco. In the neighborhood I would be considered an important person, the
daughter of the porter who since she was a child had known everything. I
alone, who had been to Pisa, who had met important professors, and Pietro,
Mariarosa, their father—I would have understood very clearly that I hadn’t
gone very far. A great effort, many hopes, wonderful moments. I would miss
the time with Franco Mari my whole life. How lovely the months, the years
with him had been. At the moment I hadn’t understood their importance, and
now here I was, growing sad. The rain, the cold, the snow, the scents of spring
along the Arno and on the flowering streets of the city, the warmth we gave
each other. Choosing a dress, glasses. His pleasure in changing me. And Paris,
the exciting trip to a foreign country, the cafés, the politics, the literature, the
revolution  that  would  soon  arrive,  even  though  the  working  class  was
becoming integrated.  And  him. His  room at  night.  His body.  All  finished.  I
tossed nervously in my bed, unable to sleep. I’m lying to myself, I thought. Had
it really been so wonderful? I knew very well that at that time, too, there had
been  shame.  And  uneasiness,  and  humiliation,  and  disgust:  accept,  submit,
force yourself. Is it possible that even happy moments of pleasure never stand
up to a rigorous examination? Possible. The blackness of the Maronti quickly
extended to Franco’s body and then to Pietro’s. I escaped from my memories.
At a certain point I began to see Pietro less frequently, with the excuse that I
was behind and was in danger of not finishing my thesis in time. One morning I
bought a graph-paper notebook and began to write, in the third person, about
what had happened to me that night on the beach near Barano. Then, still in
the third person, I wrote what had happened to me on Ischia. Then I wrote a
little about Naples and the neighborhood. Then I changed names and places
and  situations.  Then  I  imagined  a  dark  force  crouching  in  the  life  of  the
protagonist, an entity that had the capacity to weld the world around her, with
the colors of the flame of a blowtorch: a blue-violet dome where everything
went well for her, shooting sparks, but that soon came apart, breaking up into
meaningless gray fragments. I spent twenty days writing this story, a period
during which I saw no one, I went out only to eat. Finally I reread some pages, I
didn’t like them, and I forgot about it. But I found that I was calmer, as if the
shame had passed from me to the notebook. I went back into the world, I
quickly finished my thesis, I saw Pietro again.
His kindness, his thoughtfulness moved me. When he graduated the whole
family came, along with many Pisan friends of his parents. I was surprised to
find that I no longer felt resentful of what awaited Pietro, of the plan of his life.
In fact I was happy that he had such a good future and was grateful to the
whole family, who invited me to the party afterward. Mariarosa in particular
looked after me. We had a heated discussion of the fascist coup in Greece.
I graduated in the following session. I avoided telling my parents, I was
afraid that my mother would feel it her duty to come and celebrate me. I
presented myself to the professors in one of the dresses that Franco had given
me, the one that still seemed acceptable. After such a long time, I really was
pleased with myself. I wasn’t yet twenty-three and I had obtained a degree in
literature with the highest grade. My father hadn’t gone beyond fifth grade in
elementary school, my mother had stopped at second, none of my forebears, as
far as I knew, had learned to read and write fluently. It had been an astonishing
effort.
Besides  some  of  my  schoolmates,  I  found  that  Pietro  had  come  to
congratulate me. I remember that it was very hot. After the usual student
rituals, I went to my room to freshen up and leave my thesis there. He was
waiting for me downstairs, he wanted to take me to dinner. I looked at myself
in the mirror, I had the impression that I was pretty. I took the notebook with
the story I had written and put it in my purse.
It was the first time that Pietro had taken me to a restaurant. Franco had
often done so, and had taught me everything about the arrangement of the
silverware, the glasses.
He asked me, “Are we engaged?”
I smiled, I said, “I don’t know.”
He took a package out of his pocket, gave it to me. He murmured, “For this
whole  year  I  thought  so.  But  if  you  have  a  different  opinion  consider  it  a
graduation present.”
I unwrapped the package, and there was a green case. Inside was a ring with
little diamonds.
“It’s beautiful,” I said.
I tried it on, the size was right. I thought of the rings that Stefano had given
Lila, much more elaborate than that. But it was the first jewel I had received,
Franco had given me many gifts but never jewelry, the only jewelry I had was
my mother’s silver bracelet.
“We’re engaged,” I said, and, leaning across the table, kissed him on the lips.
He turned red, he said, “I have another present.”
He gave me an envelope, it was the proofs of his thesis-book. How fast, I
thought, with affection and even some joy.
“I also have a little present for you.”
“What is it?”
“Something foolish, but I don’t know what else to give you that is truly
mine.”
I took the notebook out, I gave it to him.
“It’s  a  novel,”  I  said,  “a  one  of  a  kind:  only  copy,  only  attempt,  only
capitulation. I’ll never write another one.” I added, laughing, “There are even
some rather racy parts.”
He seemed bewildered. He thanked me, he placed the notebook on the table.
I was immediately sorry I had given it to him. I thought: he’s a serious student,
he  has  great  traditions  behind  him,  he’s  about  to  publish  an  essay  on  the
Bacchic rites that will be the basis of a career; it’s my fault, I shouldn’t have
embarrassed him with a little story that’s not even typewritten. And yet even
then I didn’t feel uneasy, he was he, I was I. I told him that I had applied to
enter teachers’ training college, I told him that I would return to Naples, I told
him, laughing, that our engagement would have a difficult life, I in a city in the
south, he in one in the north. But Pietro remained serious, he had everything
clear in his mind, he laid out his plan: two years to establish himself at the
university and then he would marry me. He even set the date: September, 1969.
When we went out he forgot the notebook on the table. I pointed it out in
amusement: “My gift?” He was confused, he ran back to get it.
We walked for a long time. We kissed, we embraced on the Lungarno, I asked
him, half serious, half joking, if he wanted to sneak into my room. He shook his
head, he went back to kissing me passionately. There were entire libraries
separating him and Antonio, but they were similar.
116.
My return  to Naples  was  like having  a  defective umbrella  that  suddenly
closes over your head in a gust of wind. I arrived in the middle of summer. I
would have liked to look for a job right away, but my condition as a graduate
meant that it was unsuitable for me to go looking for little jobs like the ones I
used to have. On the other hand I had no money, and it was humiliating to ask
my father and mother, who had already sacrificed enough for me. I became
nervous. Everything irritated me, the streets, the ugly façades of the houses,
the stradone, the gardens, even though at first every stone, every smell had
moved me. If  Pietro finds  someone else, I  thought, if  I don’t get  in to the
teachers’ college, what will I do? It’s not possible that I could remain forever a
prisoner of this place and these people.
My parents, my siblings were very proud of me, but, I realized, they didn’t
know why: what use was I, why had I returned, how could they demonstrate to
the neighbors that I was the pride of the family? If you thought about it I only
complicated their life, further crowding the small apartment, making more
arduous the arrangement of beds at night, getting in the way of a daily routine
that by now didn’t allow for me. Besides, I always had my nose in a book,
standing up, sitting in one corner or another, a useless monument to study, a
self-important, serious person whom they all made it their duty not to disturb,
but about whom they also wondered: What are her intentions?
My  mother  resisted  for  a  while  before  questioning  me  about  my  fiancé,
whose existence she had deduced more from the ring that I wore on my finger
than from my confidences. She wanted to know what he did, how much he
earned, when he would introduce himself at our house with his parents, where
I would live when I was married. At first I gave her some information: he was a
professor at the university, for now he earned nothing, he was publishing a
book that was considered very important by the other professors, we would
get married in a couple of years, his parents were from Genoa, probably I
would go to live in that city or anyway wherever he established himself. But
from her intent look, from the way she kept asking the same questions, I had
the impression that, too much in the grip of her preconceptions, she wasn’t
listening. I was engaged to someone who hadn’t come and wasn’t coming to
ask for my hand, who lived very far away, who taught but wasn’t paid, who was
publishing a book but wasn’t famous? She became upset as usual, even though
she no longer got angry at me. She tried to contain her disapproval, maybe she
didn’t even feel capable of communicating it to me. Language itself, in fact, had
become a mark of alienation. I expressed myself in a way that was too complex
for her, although I made an effort to speak in dialect, and when I realized that
and  simplified  the  sentences,  the  simplification  made  them  unnatural  and
therefore confusing. Besides, the effort I had made to get rid of my Neapolitan
accent hadn’t convinced the Pisans but was convincing to her, my father, my
siblings, the whole neighborhood. On the street, in the stores, on the landing of
our building, people treated me with a mixture of respect and mockery. Behind
my back they began to call me the Pisan.
In that period I wrote long letters to Pietro, who answered with even longer
ones. At first I expected that he would make at least some reference to my
notebook, then I forgot about it myself. We said nothing concrete, I still have
those letters: there is not a single useful detail for reconstructing the daily life
of the time, what was the price of bread or a ticket to the movies, how much a
porter or a professor earned. We focused, let’s say, on a book he had read, on
an article of interest for our studies, on some reflection of his or mine, on
unrest  among  certain  university  students,  on  the  neo-avant-garde,  which  I
didn’t know anything about but which he was surprisingly well acquainted
with, and which amused him to the point of inspiring him to write: “I would
like to make a book out of crumpled-up pieces of paper: you start a sentence, it
doesn’t work, and you throw the page away. I’m collecting a few, I would have
the pages printed just as they are, crumpled, so the random pattern of the
creases is interwoven with the tentative, broken-off sentences. Maybe this is,
in  fact,  the  only  literature  possible  today.”  That  last  note  struck  me.  I
suspected, I remember, that that was his way of communicating to me that he
had read my notebook and that that literary gift of mine seemed to him a
product that had arrived too late.
In those weeks of enervating heat I felt as if the weariness of years had
poisoned my body, and I had no energy. Here and there I picked up news of
Maestra Oliviero’s state of health, I hoped that she was well, that I might see
her and gain some strength from her satisfaction in my scholastic success. I
knew that her sister had come to get her and had taken her back to Potenza. I
felt very alone. I even missed Lila, and our turbulent meeting. I felt a desire to
find her and measure the distance between us now. But I didn’t. I confined
myself to an idle, petty investigation into what people in the neighborhood
thought of her, into the rumors that were circulating.
In particular I looked for Antonio. He wasn’t there, it was said that he had
remained in Germany, some claimed that he had married a beautiful German, a
fat, blue-eyed platinum blonde, and that he was the father of twins.
So I talked to Alfonso. I went often to the shop on Piazza dei Martiri. He had
grown really handsome, he looked like a refined Spanish nobleman, he spoke
in  a  cultivated  Italian,  with  pleasing  inserts  of  dialect.  The  Solaras’  shop,
thanks to him, was thriving. His salary was satisfactory, he had rented a house
in Ponte di Tappia, and he didn’t miss the neighborhood, his siblings, the odor
and grease of the grocery stores. “Next year I’ll get married,” he announced,
without too much enthusiasm. The relationship with Marisa had lasted, had
become stable, there was only the final step. I went out sometimes with them,
they got along well; she had lost her old liveliness, her effusiveness, and now
seemed above all careful not to say anything that might annoy him. I never
asked her about her father, her mother, her brothers and sister. I didn’t even
ask about Nino nor did she mention him, as if he were gone forever out of her
life, too.
I also saw Pasquale and Carmen: he still worked on construction jobs around
Naples and the provinces, she continued to work in the new grocery. But the
thing they were eager to tell me was that both had new loves: Pasquale was
secretly seeing the oldest, though very young, daughter of the owner of the
notions shop; Carmen was engaged to the gas-station man on the stradone, a
nice man of forty who loved her dearly.
I  also  went  to  see  Pinuccia,  who  was  almost  unrecognizable:  slovenly,
nervous,  extremely  thin,  resigned  to  her  fate,  she  bore  the  marks  of  the
beatings that Rino continued to give her, taking revenge on Stefano, and, in
her eyes and in the deep creases around her mouth, even more obvious traces
of an unhappiness with no outlet.
Finally I got up my courage and tracked down Ada. I imagined I’d find her
more distressed than Pina, humiliated by her situation. Instead she lived in the
house that had been Lina’s and was beautiful, and apparently serene; she had
just given birth to a girl she had named Maria. Even during my pregnancy I
didn’t stop working, she said proudly. And I saw with my own eyes that she
was the real mistress of the two groceries, she hurried from one to the other,
she took care of everything.
Each of my childhood friends told me something about Lila, but Ada seemed
to  be  the  best  informed.  And  it  was  she  who  spoke  of  her  with  greater
understanding, almost sympathy. Ada was happy, happy with her baby, her
comforts, her work, Stefano, and it seemed to me that for all that happiness
she was sincerely grateful to Lila.
She exclaimed, admiringly, “I did things like a madwoman, I realize it. But
Lina  and  Enzo  behaved  in  an  even  crazier  way.  They  were  so  careless  of
everything, even of themselves, that they frightened me, Stefano, and even
that piece of shit Michele Solara. You know that she took nothing with her?
You know that she left me all her jewelry? You know that they wrote on a
piece  of  paper  where  they  were  going,  the  precise  address,  number,
everything, as if to say: come find us, do what you like, who gives a damn?”
I wanted the address, I took it down. While I was writing she said, “If you see
her, tell her that I’m not the one keeping Stefano from seeing the child: he has
too much to do and although he’s sorry, he can’t. Also tell her that the Solaras
don’t forget anything, especially Michele. Tell her not to trust anyone.”
117.
Enzo and Lila moved to San Giovanni a Teduccio in a used Fiat 600 that he
had just bought. During the whole journey they said nothing, but battled the
silence by talking to the child, Lila as if she were addressing an adult, and Enzo
with monosyllables like well, what, yes. She scarcely knew San Giovanni. She had
gone there once with Stefano, they had stopped in the center for coffee and
she  had  had  a  good  impression.  But  Pasquale,  who  often  came  there  for
construction work and for political activities had once talked to her about it
with great dissatisfaction, both as a worker and as a militant. “It’s a filthy
place,” he had said, “a sewer: the more wealth it produces, the more poverty
increases, and we can’t change anything, even if we’re strong.” But Pasquale
was  always  critical  of  everything  and  so  not  very  reliable.  Lila,  as  the  car
traveled  along  bumpy  streets,  past  crumbling  buildings  and  big,  newly
constructed apartment houses, preferred to tell herself that she was taking the
child to a pretty little town near the sea and thought only of the speech that, to
clarify things, out of honesty, she wanted to make to Enzo right away.
But because she was thinking about it she didn’t do it. Later, she said to
herself. So they arrived at the apartment that Enzo had rented, on the third
floor of a new building that was already shabby. The rooms were half-empty,
he said he had bought what was indispensable but that starting the next day he
would get everything she needed. Lila reassured him, he had already done too
much. Only when she saw the double bed she decided that it was time to speak:
she said in an affectionate tone: “I’ve had great respect for you, Enzo, since we
were children. You’ve done a thing I admire: you studied by yourself, you got a
diploma, and I know the determination it takes, I’ve never had it. You’re also
the most generous person I know, no one would have done what you’re doing
for Rinuccio and for me. But I can’t sleep with you. It’s not because we’ve seen
each other alone at most two or three times. And it’s not that I don’t like you.
It’s that I have no feelings, I’m like this wall or that table. So if you can live in
the same house with me without touching me, good; if you can’t I understand
and tomorrow morning I’ll look for another place. Know that I’ll always be
grateful for what you’ve done for me.”
Enzo listened without interrupting. At the end he said, pointing to the bed:
“You go there, I’ll settle on the cot.”
“I prefer the cot.”
“And Rinuccio?”
“I saw there’s another cot.”
“He sleeps by himself?”
“Yes.”
“You can stay as long as you like.”
“You’re sure?”
“Very sure.”
“I don’t want ugly things that could ruin our friendship.”
“Don’t worry.”
“I’m sorry.”
“It’s fine like this. If by chance feeling returns to you, you know where I am.”
118.
Feeling did not return to her; rather, a sense of alienation increased. The
heavy air of the rooms. The dirty clothes. The bathroom door that didn’t close
properly. I imagine that San Giovanni seemed to her an abyss on the edge of
our neighborhood. Although she had reached safety, she hadn’t been careful
where she put her feet down, and had fallen into a deep hole.
Rinuccio immediately worried her. The child, in general serene, began to
have tantrums during the day, calling for Stefano, and to wake up crying at
night. The attentions of his mother, her way of playing, calmed him, yes, but
no longer fascinated him, in fact began to annoy him. Lila invented new games,
his eyes lighted up, the child kissed her, he wanted to put his hands on her
chest, he shrieked with joy. But then he pushed her away, he played by himself
or napped on a blanket on the floor. And on the street he got tired after ten
steps, he said his knee hurt, he demanded to be picked up, and if she refused he
fell on the ground screaming.
At first Lila resisted, then slowly she began to give in. Since at night he
would quiet down only if she let him come into her bed, she let him sleep with
her. When they went out to do the shopping she carried him, even though he
was a well nourished, heavy child: on one side the bags, on the other him. She
returned exhausted.
She rediscovered what life without money was. No books, no journals or
newspapers. Rinuccio grew before her eyes, and the things she had brought no
longer fit him. She herself had very few clothes. But she pretended it was
nothing. Enzo worked all day, he gave her the money she needed, but he didn’t
earn much, and besides he had to give money to the relatives who were taking
care of his siblings. So they barely managed to pay the rent, the electricity, and
the gas. But Lila didn’t seem worried. The money she had had and had wasted
were all one, in her imagination, with the poverty of childhood, it was without
substance when it was there and when it wasn’t. She was much more worried
about the possible undoing of the education she had given her son and she
devoted herself to making him energetic, eager, receptive, as he had been until
recently. But Rinuccio now seemed to be content only when she left him on the
landing to play with the neighbor’s child. He fought, got dirty, laughed, ate
junk, appeared happy. Lila observed him from the kitchen, from there she
could see him and his friend framed by the door to the stairs. He’s smart, she
thought, he’s smarter than the other child, who’s a little older: maybe I should
accept that I can’t coddle him, that I’ve given him what’s necessary but from
now on he’ll manage by himself, now he needs to hit, take things away from
other children, get dirty.
One  day,  Stefano  appeared  on  the  landing.  He  had  left  the  grocery  and
decided to come and see his son. Rinuccio greeted him joyfully, Stefano played
with him for a while. But Lila saw that her husband was bored, he couldn’t wait
to leave. In the past it had seemed that he couldn’t live without her and the
child; instead here he was, looking at his watch, yawning, almost certainly he
had come because his mother or even Ada had sent him. As for love, jealousy, it
had all passed, he wasn’t agitated anymore.
“I’ll take the child for a walk.”
“Watch out, he always wants to be picked up.”
“I’ll carry him.”
“No, make him walk.”
“I’ll do as I like.”
They went out, he returned half an hour later, he said he had to hurry back
to the grocery. He swore that Rinuccio hadn’t complained, hadn’t asked to be
picked up. Before he left he said, “I see that here you’re known as Signora
Cerullo.”
“That’s what I am.”
“I didn’t kill you and I won’t kill you only because you’re the mother of my
son. But you and that shit friend of yours are taking a big risk.”
Lila laughed, she provoked him, saying, “You’re only tough with people who
can’t crack your head open, you bastard.”
Then she realized that her husband was alluding to Solara and she yelled at
him from the landing, as he was going down the stairs: “Tell Michele that if he
shows up here I’ll spit in his face.”
Stefano didn’t answer, he disappeared into the street. He returned, I think,
at most four or five more times. That last time he met his wife he yelled at her,
furiously, “You are the shame of your family. Even your mother doesn’t want
to see you anymore.”
“It’s clear that they never understood what a life I had with you.”
“I treated you like a queen.”
“Better a beggar, then.”
“If  you  have  another  child  you’d  better  abort  it,  because  you  have  my
surname and I don’t want it to be my child.”
“I’m not going to have any more children.”
“Why? Have you decided not to screw anymore?”
“Fuck off.”
“Anyway, I warned you.”
“Rinuccio isn’t your son, and yet he has your surname.”
“Whore, you keep saying it so it must be true. I don’t want to see you or him
anymore.”
He never really believed her. But he pretended, because it was convenient.
He  preferred  a  peaceful  life  that  would  vanquish  the  emotional  chaos  she
caused him.
119.
Lila told Enzo in detail about her husband’s visits. He listened attentively
and almost never made comments. He continued to be restrained in every
expression of himself. He didn’t even tell her what sort of work he did in the
factory and if it suited him or not. He went out at six in the morning and
returned at seven in the evening. He ate dinner, he played a little with the boy,
he listened to her conversation. As soon as Lila mentioned some urgent need of
Rinuccio’s, the next day he brought the necessary money. He never told her to
ask Stefano to contribute to the maintenance of his child, he didn’t tell her to
find a job. He simply looked at her as if he lived only to get to those evening
hours, to sit with her in the kitchen, listening to her talk. At a certain point he
got up, said goodnight, and went into the bedroom.
One afternoon Lila had an encounter that had significant consequences. She
went out alone, having left Rinuccio with the neighbor. She heard an insistent
horn behind her. It was a fancy car, someone was signaling to her from the
window.
“Lina.”
She looked closely. She recognized the wolfish face of Bruno Soccavo, Nino’s
friend.
“What are you doing here?” he asked.
“I live here.”
She said almost nothing about herself, since at that time such things were
difficult to explain. She didn’t mention Nino, nor did he. She asked instead if he
had graduated, he said he had decided to stop studying.
“Are you married?”
“Of course not.”
“Engaged?”
“One day yes, the next no.”
“What do you do?”
“Nothing, there are people who work for me.”
It occurred to her to ask him, almost as a joke: “Would you give me a job?”
“You? What do you need a job for?”
“To work.”
“You want to make salami and mortadella?”
“Why not.”
“And your husband?”
“I don’t have a husband anymore. But I have a son.”
Bruno looked at her attentively to see if she was joking. He seemed confused,
evasive.  “It’s  not  a  nice  job,”  he  said.  Then  he  talked  volubly  about  the
problems of couples in general, about his mother, who was always fighting
with  his  father,  about  a  violent  passion  he  himself  had  had  recently  for  a
married  woman,  but  she  had  left  him.  Bruno  was  unusually  talkative,  he
invited her to a café, continuing to tell her about himself. Finally, when Lila
said she had to go, he asked, “Did you really leave your husband? You really
have a child?”
“Yes.”
He frowned, wrote something on a napkin.
“Go to this man, you’ll find him in the morning after eight. And show him
this.”
Lila smiled in embarrassment.
“The napkin?”
“Yes.”
“It’s enough?”
He nodded yes, suddenly made shy by her teasing tone. He murmured, “That
was a wonderful summer.”
She said, “For me, too.”
120.
All  this  I  found  out  later.  I  would  have  liked  to  use  the  address  in  San
Giovanni that Ada had given me right away, but something crucial happened to
me as well. One morning I was lazily reading a long letter from Pietro and at
the end of the last page I found a few lines in which he told me that he had had
his mother read my text (that’s what he called it). Adele had found it so good
that she had typed it and had sent it to a publisher in Milan for whom she had
done translations for years. They had liked it and wanted to publish it.
It was a late autumn morning, I remember a gray light. I sat at the kitchen
table, the same one on which my mother was ironing the clothes. The old iron
slid  over  the  material  with  energy,  the  wood  vibrated  under  my  elbows.  I
looked at those lines for a long time. I said softly, in Italian, only to convince
myself that the thing was real: “Mamma, here it says that they are going to
publish a novel I wrote.” My mother stopped, lifted the iron off the material,
set it down upright.
“You wrote a novel?” she asked in dialect.
“I think so.”
“Did you write it or not?”
“Yes.”
“Will they pay you?”
“I don’t know.”
I went out, ran to the Bar Solara, where you could make long-distance phone
calls in some comfort. After several attempts—Gigliola called from the bar, “Go
on, talk”—Pietro answered but he had to work and was in a hurry. He said that
he didn’t know anything more about the business than he had written me.
“Did you read it?” I asked, in agitation.
“Yes.”
“But you never said anything.”
He stammered something about lack of time, studying, responsibilities.
“How is it?”
“Good.”
“Good and that’s all?”
“Good. Talk to my mother, I’m a philologist, not a literary person.”
He gave me the number of his parents’ house.
“I don’t want to telephone, I’m embarrassed.”
I sensed some irritation, rare in him who was always so courteous. He said,
“You’ve written a novel, you take responsibility for it.”
I  scarcely  knew  Adele  Airota,  I  had  seen  her  four  times  and  we  had
exchanged only a few formal remarks. In all that time I had been sure she was a
wealthy, cultivated wife and mother—the Airotas never said anything about
themselves, they acted as if their activities in the world were of scant interest,
yet took it for granted that these activities were known to everyone—and only
now began to realize that she had a job, that she was able to exercise power. I
telephoned anxiously, the maid answered, gave her the phone. I was greeted
cordially,  but  she  used  the  formal  lei  and  I  did,  too.  She  said  that  at  the
publishing house they were all very excited about how good the book was and,
as far as she knew, a draft of the contract had already been sent.
“Contract?”
“Of course. Have you dealt with other publishers?”
“No. But I haven’t even reread what I wrote.”
“You wrote only a single draft, all at once?” she asked, vaguely ironic.
“Yes.”
“I assure you that it’s ready for publication.”
“I still need to work on it.”
“Trust yourself: don’t touch a comma, there is sincerity, naturalness, and a
mystery in the writing that only true books have.”
She congratulated me again, although she accentuated the irony. She said
that, as I knew, even the Aeneid wasn’t polished. She ascribed to me a long
apprenticeship as a writer, asked if I had other things, appeared amazed when I
confessed  that  it  was  the  first  thing  I  had  written.  “Talent  and  luck,”  she
exclaimed. She told me that there was an unexpected opening in the editorial
list and my novel had been considered not only very good but lucky. They
thought of bringing it out in the spring.
“So soon?”
“Are you opposed?”
I quickly said no.
Gigliola, who was behind the bar and had listened to the phone call, finally
asked me, inquisitively, “What’s happening?”
“I don’t know,” I said and left.
I wandered around the neighborhood overwhelmed by an incredulous joy,
my  temples  pounding.  My  answer  to  Gigliola  hadn’t  been  a  hostile  way  of
cutting her off, I really didn’t know. What was that unexpected announcement:
a few lines from Pietro, long-distance words, nothing certainly true? And what
was a contract, it meant money, it meant rights and duties, was I in danger of
getting in some trouble? In a few days I’ll find out that they’ve changed their
mind, I thought, the book won’t be published. They’ll reread the story, those
who found it good will find it pointless, those who haven’t read it will be angry
with those who were eager to publish it, they’ll all be angry with Adele Airota,
and Adele Airota herself will change her mind, she’ll feel humiliated, she’ll
blame me for disgracing her, she’ll persuade her son to leave me. I passed the
building where the old neighborhood library was: how long it had been since
I’d set foot in it. I went in, it was empty, it smelled of dust and boredom. I
moved absentmindedly along the shelves, I touched tattered books without
looking at title or author, just to feel them with my fingers. Old paper, curled
cotton threads, letters of the alphabet, ink. Volumes, a dizzying word. I looked
for Little Women, I found it. Was it possible that it was really about to happen?
Possible that what Lila and I had planned to do together was happening to me?
In a few months there would be printed paper sewn, pasted, all covered with
my words, and on the cover the name, Elena Greco, me, breaking the long
chain of illiterates, semi-literates, an obscure surname that would be charged
with light for eternity. In a few years—three, five, ten, twenty—the book would
end up on those shelves, in the library of the neighborhood where I was born,
it would be catalogued, people would ask to borrow it to find out what the
daughter of the porter had written. I heard the flush of the toilet, I waited for
Maestro Ferraro to appear, just as when I was a diligent girl: the same fleshless
face, perhaps more wrinkled, the crew-cut hair white but still thick over the
low forehead. Here’s someone who could appreciate what was happening to
me, who would more than justify my burning head, the fierce pounding in my
temples. But from the bathroom a stranger emerged, a small rotund man of
around forty.
“Do you want to take out books?” he asked. “Do it quickly because I’m about
to close.”
“I was looking for Maestro Ferraro.”
“Ferraro is retired.”
Do it quickly, he was about to close.
I left. Just now that I was becoming a writer, there was no one in the entire
neighborhood capable of saying: What an extraordinary thing you’ve done.
121.
I didn’t imagine that I would earn money. But I received the draft of the
contract and discovered that, surely thanks to Adele’s support, the publisher
was giving me an advance of two hundred thousand lire, a hundred on signing
and a hundred on delivery. My mother was speechless, she couldn’t believe it.
My father said, “It takes months for me to earn that much money.” They both
began to brag in the neighborhood and outside: our daughter has become rich,
she’s  a  writer,  she’s  marrying  a  university  professor.  I  flourished  again,  I
stopped studying for the teachers’ college exam. As soon as the money arrived
I  bought  a  dress,  some  makeup,  went  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  to  the
hairdresser, and left for Milan, a city unknown to me.
At the station I had trouble orienting myself. Finally I found the right metro,
and arrived nervously at the door of the publishing house. I gave a thousand
explanations to the porter, who hadn’t asked me anything, and who in fact,
while I spoke, continued to read the newspaper. I went up in the elevator, I
knocked, I went in. I was struck by how neat and tidy it was. My head was
crowded with all that I had studied and I wanted to display it, to demonstrate
that even if I was a woman, even if you could see my origins, I was a person
who at twenty-three, had won the right to publish that book, and now, nothing
nothing nothing about me could be called into question.
I was greeted politely, led from office to office. I talked with the editor who
was working on my manuscript, an old man, bald, with a very pleasant face. We
talked for a couple of hours, he praised me, he cited Adele Airota often, with
great respect, he showed me some revisions that he suggested, he left me a
copy of the text and his notes. As he was saying goodbye he added, in a serious
voice,  “The  story  is  good,  a  contemporary  story  very  well  expressed,  the
writing is always surprising; but that’s not the point. It’s the third time I’ve
read the book and on every page there is something powerful whose origin I
can’t figure out.” I turned red, thanked him. Ah, how much I had been able to
do, and how rapid it all was, how well liked I was and how likable I had become,
I could speak about my studies, where I had done them, about my thesis on the
fourth book of the Aeneid: I replied with courteous precision to courteous
observations,  mimicking  perfectly  the  tones  of  Professor  Galiani,  of  her
children, of Mariarosa. A pretty, amiable woman named Gina asked if I needed
a hotel and, at my nod of assent, found me one on Via Garibaldi. To my great
amazement  I  discovered  that  everything  was  charged  to  the  publisher,
everything that I spent on food, the train tickets. Gina told me to present a
record of expenses, I would be reimbursed, and she asked me to say hello to
Adele for her. “She called me,” she said. “She’s very fond of you.”
The  next  day  I  left  for  Pisa,  I  wanted  to  embrace  Pietro.  On  the  train  I
considered one by one the editor’s notes and, satisfied, I saw my book with the
eyes of one who praised it and was working to make it even better. I arrived
very pleased with myself. My fiancé found me a place to sleep at the house of
an old assistant professor of Greek literature whom I also knew. In the evening
he took me to dinner and to my surprise showed me my manuscript. He, too,
had a copy and had made some notes, we looked at them together one by one.
They  bore  the  imprint  of  his  usual  rigor  and  had  to  do  mostly  with  the
vocabulary.
“I’ll take care of them,” I said thanking him.
After  dinner  we  walked  to  an  isolated  meadow.  After  we  had  held  and
touched each other for a long time in the cold, obstructed by coats and woolen
sweaters, he asked me to revise and polish with care the pages where the
protagonist  loses  her  virginity  on  the  beach.  I  said,  bewildered,  “It’s  an
important moment.”
“You yourself said that that part is a bit risqué.”
“At the publisher no one objected.”
“They’ll talk to you about it later.”
I became irritated, I told him that I would think about it and the next day I
left for Naples in a bad mood. If that episode upset Pietro, who was a young
man of wide reading, and had written a book on Bacchic rites, what would my
mother and father say, my siblings, the neighborhood, if they read it? On the
train I worked on the manuscript, keeping in mind the observations of the
editor, and Pietro’s, and what I could eliminate I did. I wanted the book to be
good, I didn’t want anyone to dislike it. I doubted that I would ever write
another.
122.
As soon as I got home I had some bad news. My mother, convinced that it
was her right to look at my mail when I was absent, had opened a package that
came from Potenza. In the package she had found a number of my notebooks
from elementary school and a note from Maestra Oliviero’s sister. The teacher,
the  note  said,  had  died  peacefully,  twenty  days  earlier.  She  had  often
remembered me, in recent times, and had asked that some notebooks from
elementary school that she had saved be returned to me. I was distressed, even
more than my sister Elisa, who wept inconsolably for hours. This bothered my
mother, who first yelled at her younger daughter and then, so that I, her older
daughter,  could  hear  it  clearly,  commented  aloud:  “That  imbecile  always
thought she was more of a mother than I am.”
All day I thought of Maestra Oliviero and of how she would have been proud
to  know  about  my  degree,  about  the  book  I  was  going  to  publish.  When
everyone went to bed I shut myself in the silent kitchen and leafed through the
notebooks one after the other. How well she had taught me, the teacher, what
beautiful handwriting she had instilled. Too bad that my adult writing had
gotten smaller, that speed had simplified the letters. I smiled at the spelling
mistakes, marked with furious strokes, at the goods, the excellents, which she
wrote punctiliously in the margin when she found a good expression or the
right solution to a difficult problem, at the high marks she always gave me.
Had she really been more mother than my mother? For a time I hadn’t been
sure.  But  she  had  imagined  for  me  a  road  that  my  mother  wasn’t  able  to
imagine and had compelled me to take it. For this I was grateful to her.
I was putting aside the package to go to bed when I noticed in the middle of
one of the notebooks a small, thin sheaf of paper, ten pages of graph paper
fastened with a pin and  refolded. I felt a sudden  emptiness in my chest:  I
recognized The Blue Fairy, the story that Lila had written so many years before,
how many? Thirteen, fourteen. How I had loved the cover colored with pastels,
the beautifully drawn letters of the title: at the time I had considered it a real
book and had been envious of it. I opened it to the center page. The pin had
rusted, leaving brown marks on the paper. I saw, with amazement, that the
teacher had written beside a sentence: beautiful. So she had read it? So she had
liked it? I turned the pages one after the other, they were full of her wonderfuls,
goods, very goods. I got angry. Old witch, I thought, why didn’t you tell us that
you liked it, why did you deny Lila that satisfaction? What drove you to fight
for my education and not for hers? Is the refusal of the shoemaker to let his
daughter  take  the  admission  examination  enough  to  justify  you?  What
unhappiness did you have in your head that you unloaded onto her? I began to
read  The  Blue  Fairy  from  the  beginning,  racing  over  the  pale  ink,  the
handwriting so similar to mine of that time. But already at the first page I
began to feel sick to my stomach and soon I was covered with sweat. Only at
the end, however, did I admit what I had understood after a few lines. Lila’s
childish pages were the secret heart of my book. Anyone who wanted to know
what gave it warmth and what the origin was of the strong but invisible thread
that joined the sentences would have had to go back to that child’s packet, ten
notebook pages, the rusty pin, the brightly colored cover, the title, and not
even a signature.
123.
I didn’t sleep all night, I waited until it was day. The long hostility toward
Lila dissolved, suddenly what I had taken from her seemed to me much more
than what she had ever been able to take from me. I decided to go right away
to San Giovanni a Teduccio. I wanted to give her back The Blue Fairy, show her
my notebooks, page through them together, enjoy the teacher’s comments.
But most of all I felt the need to have her sit beside me, to tell her, you see how
connected we are, one in two, two in one, and prove to her with the rigor that
it seemed to me I had learned in the Normale, with the philological persistence
I had learned from Pietro, how her child’s book had put down deep roots in my
mind and had, in the course of the years, produced another book, different,
adult, mine, and yet inseparable from hers, from the fantasies that we had
elaborated together in the courtyard of our games, she and I continuously
formed, deformed, reformed. I wanted to embrace her, kiss her, and tell her,
Lila, from now on, whatever happens to me or you, we mustn’t lose each other
anymore.
But it was a hard morning, it seemed to me that the city did everything
possible to get between me and her. I took a crowded bus that went toward the
Marina, I was unbearably squashed by miserable bodies. I got on another, even
more crowded bus, I went in the wrong direction. I got out, upset, disheveled, I
waited for a long time, angrily, to make up for the mistake. That small journey
through Naples exhausted me. What was the use of years of middle school,
high school, university, in that city? To arrive at San Giovanni I had forcibly to
regress, as if Lila had gone to live not in a street, or a square, but in a ripple of
time past, before we went to school, a black time without rules and without
respect. I resorted to the most violent dialect of the neighborhood, I insulted, I
was insulted, I threatened, I was mocked, I responded by mocking, a spiteful
art in which I was trained. Naples had been very useful in Pisa, but Pisa was no
use  in  Naples,  it  was  an  obstacle.  Good  manners,  cultured  voice  and
appearance, the crush in my head and on my tongue of what I had learned in
books were all immediate signs of weakness that made me a secure prey, one of
those who don’t struggle. On the buses and the streets heading toward San
Giovanni I fused the old capacity to stop being meek at the right moment with
the pride of my new state: I had a degree, I had had lunch with Professor
Airota, I was engaged to his son, I had deposited money in the Post Office, in
Milan I had been treated with respect by important people; how could these
shitty people dare? I felt a power that no longer knew how to adjust to the
pretend not to notice with which, in general, it was possible to survive in the
neighborhood and outside it. Whenever, in the throng of passengers, I felt
male hands on my body, I gave myself the sacrosanct right to fury and reacted
with cries of contempt, I said unrepeatable words like the ones my mother and,
especially, Lila knew how to say. I was so excessive that when I got off the bus I
was sure that someone would jump off behind me and murder me.
It didn’t happen, but I walked away angry and scared. I had been much too
neat when I left the house, now I felt mangled, outside and in.
I tried to compose myself, I said to myself: calm down, you’re almost there. I
asked  the  passersby  for  directions.  I  walked  along  Corso  San  Giovanni  a
Teduccio with the cold wind in my face, it seemed a yellowish channel with
defaced  walls,  black  doorways,  dirt.  I  wandered,  confused  by  friendly
information so crowded with details that it turned out to be useless. Finally I
found the street, the building. I went up the dirty stairs, following a strong
odor of garlic, the voices of children. A very fat woman in a green sweater
looking out of an open door saw me and cried, “Who do you want?” “Carracci,”
I  said.  But  seeing  that  she  was  perplexed  I  corrected  myself  immediately:
“Scanno.” Enzo’s surname. And then, afterward, “Cerullo.” At that point the
woman repeated Cerullo and said, raising a large arm, “Farther up.” I thanked
her, kept going, while she leaned over the banister and, looking up, shouted,
“Titì, there’s someone looking for Lina, she’s coming up.”
Lina. Here, in the mouths of strangers, in this place. I realized only then that
I had in mind Lila as I had seen her the last time, in the apartment in the new
neighborhood, in the orderliness that, however charged with anguish it had
been, now seemed the backdrop of her life, the furniture, the refrigerator, the
television, the well-cared-for child, she herself with a look certainly worn out
but still that of a well-off young woman. I knew nothing, at that moment, of
how she lived, what she did. The gossip had stopped at the abandonment of her
husband, at the incredible fact that she had left a beautiful house and money
and gone away with Enzo Scanno. I didn’t know about the encounter with
Soccavo. So I had left the neighborhood in the certainty that I would find her
in a new house among open books and educational games for her son, or, at
most, out momentarily, doing the shopping. And, out of laziness, in order not
to feel uneasy, I had mechanically placed those images inside a toponymy, San
Giovanni a Teduccio, beyond the Granili, at the end of the Marina. I went up
with that expectation. I thought, I’ve made it, here I am at my destination. So I
reached  Titina.  A  young  woman  with  a  baby  in  her  arms  who  was  crying
quietly, with slight sobs, rivulets of mucous dripping onto her upper lip from
cold-reddened nostrils, and two more children attached to her skirts, one on
each side.
Titina turned her gaze to the door opposite, closed.
“Lina’s not here,” she said, in a hostile tone.
“Nor Enzo?”
“No.”
“Did she take the child for a walk?”
“Who are you?”
“My name is Elena Greco, I’m a friend.”
“And you don’t recognize Rinuccio? Rinù, have you ever seen this lady?”
She  boxed  the  ear  of  one  of  the  children  beside  her,  and  only  then  I
recognized him. The child smiled at me, he said in Italian, “Hello, Aunt Lenù.
Mamma will be back tonight at eight.”
I picked him up, hugged him, praised how cute he was and how well he
spoke.
“He’s very clever,” Titina admitted, “he’s a born professor.”
At that point, her hostility ceased, she invited me to come in. In the dark
corridor I stumbled on something that surely belonged to the children. The
kitchen was untidy, everything was sunk in a grayish light. There was a sewing
machine with some material still under the needle, and around and on the
floor  other  fabric  of  various  colors.  Suddenly  ashamed,  Titina  tried  to
straighten the room, then she gave up and made coffee, but continuing to hold
her daughter in her arms. I sat Rinuccio on my lap, asked him stupid questions
that he answered with lively resignation. The woman meanwhile told me about
Lila and Enzo.
“She makes salami at Soccavo,” she said.
I was surprised, only then did I remember Bruno.
“Soccavo, the sausage people?”
“Soccavo, yes.”
“I know him.”
“They are not nice people.”
“I know the son.”
“Grandfather, father, and son, same shit. They made money and forgot they
ever went around in rags.”
I asked about Enzo. She said he worked at the locomotives, she used that
expression, and I soon realized that she thought he and Lila were married, she
called Enzo, with liking and respect, “Signor Cerullo.”
“When will Lina be back?”
“Tonight.”
“And the child?”
“He stays with me, eats, plays, does everything here.”
So the journey wasn’t over: I approached, Lila moved away. I asked, “How
long does it take to walk to the factory?”
“Twenty minutes.”
Titina  gave  me  directions,  which  I  wrote  down  on  a  piece  of  paper.
Meanwhile Rinuccio asked politely, “May I go play, aunt?” He waited for me to
say yes, he ran into the hall with the other child, and immediately I heard him
yelling a nasty insult in dialect. The woman gave me an embarrassed look and
shouted from the kitchen, in Italian, “Rino, bad words aren’t nice, watch out or
I’ll come and give you a rap on the knuckles.”
I smiled at her, remembering my trip on the bus. I also deserve a rap on the
knuckles, I thought, I’m in the same condition as Rinuccio. When the quarrel in
the  hall  didn’t  stop,  we  ran  out.  The  two  boys  were  hitting  each  other,
throwing things and yelling fiercely.
124.
I arrived at the site of the Soccavo factory by a dirt path, amid trash of every
type, a thread of black smoke in the frozen sky. Before I even saw the boundary
wall I noticed a sickening odor of animal fat mixed with burned wood. The
guard said, derisively, you don’t go visiting your girlfriend during working
hours. I asked to speak to Bruno Soccavo. He changed his tone, stammered that
Bruno almost never came to the factory. Call him at home, I replied. He was
embarrassed, he said that he couldn’t bother him for no reason. “If you don’t
call,” I said, “I’ll go and find a telephone and do it myself.” He gave me a nasty
look, he didn’t know what to do. A man came by on a bicycle, braked, said
something obscene to him in dialect. The guard appeared relieved to see him.
He began to talk to him as if I no longer existed.
At the center of the courtyard a bonfire was burning. The flame cut the cold
air for a few seconds as I passed. I reached a low building of a yellow color, I
pushed open a heavy door, I entered. The smell of fat, already strong outside,
was unendurable. I met a girl who, obviously angry, was fixing her hair with
agitated gestures. I said Excuse me, she passed by with her head down, took
three or four steps, stopped.
“What is it?” she asked rudely.
“I’m looking for someone called Cerullo.”
“Lina?”
“Yes.”
“Look in sausage-stuffing.”
I asked where it was, she didn’t answer, she walked away. I pushed open
another door. I was assailed by a warmth that made the odor of fat even more
nauseating. The place was big, there were tubs full of a milky, steaming water
in  which  dark  bodies  floated,  stirred  by  slow,  bent  silhouettes,  workers
immersed up to their hips. I didn’t see Lila. I asked a man who, lying on the
swampy tile floor, was fixing a pipe: “Do you know where I could find Lina?”
“Cerullo?”
“Cerullo.”
“In the mixing department.”
“They told me stuffing.”
“Then why are you asking me, if you know?”
“Where is mixing?”
“Straight ahead.”
“And stuffing?”
“To the right. If you don’t find her there, look where they’re stripping the
meat off the carcasses. Or in the storerooms. They’re always moving her.”
“Why?”
He had a malicious smile.
“Is she a friend of yours?”
“Yes.”
“Forget it.”
“Tell me.”
“You won’t be offended?”
“No.”
“She’s a pain in the ass.”
I followed the directions, no one stopped me. The workers, both men and
women,  seemed  to  be  enveloped  in  a  bitter  indifference;  even  when  they
laughed or shouted insults they seemed remote from their very laughter, from
their voices, from the swill they handled, from the bad smell. I emerged among
women in blue smocks who worked with the meat, caps on their heads: the
machines  produced  a  clanking  sound  and  a  mush  of  soft,  ground,  mixed
matter. But Lila wasn’t there. And I didn’t see her where they were stuffing
skins with the rosy pink paste mixed with bits of fat, or where, with sharp
knives, they skinned, gutted, cut, using the blades with a dangerous frenzy. I
found her in the storerooms. She came out of a refrigerator along with a sort of
white breath. With the help of a short man, she was carrying a reddish block of
frozen meat on her back. She placed it on a cart, she started to go back into the
cold. I immediately saw that one hand was bandaged.
“Lila.”
She turned cautiously, stared at me uncertainly. “What are you doing here?”
she said. Her eyes were feverish, her cheeks more hollow than usual, and yet
she seemed large, tall. She, too, wore a blue smock, but over it a kind of long
coat, and on her feet she wore army boots. I wanted to embrace her but I didn’t
dare: I was afraid, I don’t know why, that she would crumble in my arms. It was
she, instead, who hugged me for long minutes. I felt the damp material that
gave off a smell even more offensive than the smell in the air. “Come,” she said,
“let’s get out of here,” and shouted at the man who was working with her:
“Two minutes.” She drew me into a corner.
“How did you find me?”
“I came in.”
“And they let you pass?”
“I said I was looking for you and that I was a friend of Bruno’s.”
“Good, that way they’ll be convinced that I give the son of the owner blow
jobs and they’ll leave me alone.”
“What do you mean?”
“That’s how it works.”
“Here?”
“Everywhere. Did you get your degree?”
“Yes. But an even more wonderful thing happened, Lila. I wrote a novel and
it’s being published in April.”
Her complexion was gray, she seemed bloodless, and yet she flared up. I saw
the red move up along her throat, her cheeks, up to the edge of her eyes, so
close that she squeezed them as if fearing that the flame would burn the pupils.
Then she took my hand and kissed it, first on the back, then on the palm.
“I’m happy for you,” she murmured.
But at the moment I scarcely noticed the affection of the gesture, I was
struck by the swelling of her hands and the wounds, cuts old and new, a fresh
one on the thumb of her left hand whose edges were inflamed, and I could
imagine that under the bandage on her right hand she had an even worse
injury.
“What have you done to yourself?”
She immediately withdrew, put her hands in her pockets.
“Nothing. Stripping meat off the bones ruins your fingers.”
“You strip the meat?”
“They put me where they like.”
“Talk to Bruno.”
“Bruno is the worst shit of them all. He shows up only to see who of us he
can fuck in the aging room.”
“Lila.”
“It’s the truth.”
“Are you ill?”
“I’m very well. Here in the storerooms they give me ten lire more an hour
for cold damage.”
The man called: “Cerù, the two minutes are up.”
“Coming,” she said.
I murmured, “Maestra Oliviero died.”
She shrugged, said, “She was sick, it was bound to happen.”
I added in a hurry, because I saw that the man next to the cart was getting
anxious, “She let me have The Blue Fairy.”
“What’s The Blue Fairy?”
I looked at her to see if it was true that she didn’t remember and she seemed
sincere.
“The book you wrote when you were ten.”
“Book?”
“That’s what we called it.”
Lila pressed her lips together, shook her head. She was alarmed, she was
afraid of getting in trouble at work, but in my presence she acted the part of
someone who does as she likes. I have to go, I thought.
She said, “A long time has passed since then,” and shivered.
“Do you have a fever?”
“No.”
I looked for the packet in my purse, gave it to her. She took it, recognized it,
but showed no emotion.
“I was an arrogant child,” she muttered.
I quickly contradicted her.
“The story is still beautiful today,” I said. “I read it again and discovered
that, without realizing it, I’ve always had it in my mind. That’s where my book
comes from.”
“From  this  nonsense?”  she  laughed  loudly,  nervously.  “Then  whoever
printed it is crazy.”
The man shouted, “I’m waiting for you, Cerullo.”
“You’re a pain in the ass,” she answered.
She put the packet in her pocket and took me under the arm. We went
toward the exit. I thought of how I had dressed up for her and how hard it had
been to get to that place. I had imagined tears, confidences, talk, a wonderful
morning of confessions and reconciliation. Instead here we were, walking arm
in arm, she bundled up, dirty, scarred, I disguised as a young lady of good
family. I told her that Rinuccio was cute and very intelligent. I praised the
neighbor, asked about Enzo. She was glad that I had found the child well, she in
turn praised the neighbor. But it was the mention of Enzo that kindled her, she
lighted up, became talkative.
“He’s kind,” she said, “he’s good, he’s not afraid of anything, he’s extremely
smart and he studies at night, he knows so many things.”
I had never heard her talk about anyone in that way. I asked, “What does he
study?”
“Mathematics.”
“Enzo?”
“Yes. He read something about electronic calculators or saw an ad, I don’t
know, and he got excited. He says a calculator isn’t like you see in the movies,
all colored lights that light up and go out with a bip. He said it’s a question of
languages.”
“Languages?”
She had that familiar narrow gaze.
“Not  languages  for  writing  novels,”  she  said,  and  the  dismissive  tone  in
which she uttered the word “novels” disturbed me, the laugh that followed
disturbed me. “Programming languages. At night, after the baby goes to sleep,
Enzo starts studying.”
Her lower lip was dry, cracked by the cold, her face marred by fatigue. And
yet with what pride she had said: he starts studying. I saw that, in spite of the
third person singular, it wasn’t only Enzo who was excited about the subject.
“And what do you do?”
“I keep him company: he’s tired and if he’s by himself he feels like sleeping.
But together it’s great, one of us says one thing, one another. You know what a
flow chart is?”
I shook my head. Her eyes then became very small, she let go of my arm, she
began to talk, drawing me into that new passion. In the courtyard, with the
odor of the bonfire and the stink of animal fats, flesh, nerves, this Lila, wrapped
up in an overcoat but also wearing a blue smock, her hands cut, disheveled,
very pale, without a trace of makeup, regained life and energy. She spoke of
the reduction of everything to the alternative true-false, she quoted Boolean
algebra and many other things I knew nothing about. And yet her words, as
usual, fascinated me. As she spoke, I saw the wretched house at night, the child
sleeping in the other room; I saw Enzo sitting on the bed, worn out from work
on the locomotives in who knows what factory; I saw her, after the day at the
cooking tubs or in the gutting room or in the storerooms at twenty below zero,
sitting  with  him  on  the  blanket.  I  saw  them  both  in  the  terrible  light  of
sacrificed sleep, I heard their voices: they did exercises with the flow charts,
they practiced cleaning the world of the superfluous, they charted the actions
of the day according to only two values of truth: zero and one. Obscure words
in the miserable room, whispered so as not to wake Rinuccio. I understood that
I had arrived there full of pride and realized that—in good faith, certainly, with
affection—I had made that whole journey mainly to show her what she had lost
and what I had won. But she had known from the moment I appeared, and
now, risking tensions with her workmates, and fines, she was explaining to me
that I had won nothing, that in the world there is nothing to win, that her life
was  full  of  varied  and  foolish  adventures  as  much  as  mine,  and  that  time
simply slipped away without any meaning, and it was good just to see each
other every so often to hear the mad sound of the brain of one echo in the mad
sound of the brain of the other.
“Do you like living with him?” I asked.
“Yes.”
“Will you have children?”
She had an expression of feigned amusement.
“We’re not together.”
“No?”
“No, I don’t feel like it.”
“And he?”
“He’s waiting.”
“Maybe he’s like a brother.”
“No, I like him.”
“So?”
“I don’t know.”
We stopped beside the fire, she gestured toward the guard. “Look out for
him,”  she  said.  “When  you  go  out  he’s  liable  to  accuse  you  of  stealing  a
mortadella just so he can search you and put his hands all over you.”
We embraced, we kissed each other. I said I would see her again, I didn’t
want to lose her, and I was sincere. She smiled, she said, “Yes, I don’t want to
lose you, either.” I felt that she, too, was sincere.
I went away in great agitation. Inside was the struggle to leave her, the old
conviction that without her nothing truly important would ever happen to me,
and yet I felt the need to get away, to free my nostrils of that stink of fat. After
a few quick steps I couldn’t help it, I turned to wave again. I saw her standing
beside the bonfire, without the shape of a woman in that outfit, as she leafed
through the pages of the Blue Fairy. Suddenly she threw it on the fire.
125.
I hadn’t told her what the story of my book was or when it would be in
bookstores. I hadn’t even told her about Pietro, of the plan to get married in a
couple  of  years.  Her  life  had  overwhelmed  me  and  it  took  days  for  me  to
restore clear outlines and depth to mine. What finally restored me to myself—
but  what  myself?—was  the  proofs  of  the  book:  a  hundred  and  thirty-nine
pages, thick paper, the words of the notebook, fixed by my handwriting, which
had become pleasantly alien thanks to the printed characters.
I spent happy hours reading, rereading, correcting. Outside it was cold, a
frigid wind slipped in through the loose window frames. I sat at the kitchen
table with Gianni and Elisa, who were studying. My mother was busily working
around us, but with surprising care, in order not to disturb me.
Soon I went to Milan again. This time I allowed myself, for the first time in
my life, to take a taxi. The bald editor, at the end of a day spent evaluating the
final corrections, said to me, “I’ll call you a taxi,” and I didn’t know how to say
no. So it happened that when I went from Milan to Pisa, at the station I looked
around  and  thought:  why  not,  let’s  play  the  great  lady  again.  And  the
temptation  resurfaced  when  I  returned  to  Naples,  in  the  chaos  of  Piazza
Garibaldi. I would have liked to arrive in the neighborhood in a taxi, sitting
comfortably in the back seat, a driver at my service, who, when we reached the
gate, would open the door for me. I took the bus instead, I didn’t feel up to it.
But something about me must have been different, because when I greeted
Ada, who was taking her baby out for a walk, she looked at me distractedly, and
walked by. Then she stopped, turned back, said, “How well you look, I didn’t
recognize you, you’re different.”
At the moment I was pleased, but soon I became unhappy. What advantage
could  I  have  gained  from  becoming  different?  I  wanted  to  remain  myself,
chained to Lila, to the courtyard, to the lost dolls, to Don Achille, to everything.
It was the only way to feel intensely what was happening to me. Yet change is
hard to oppose: in that period, in spite of myself, I changed more than in the
years in Pisa. In the spring the book came out, which, much more than my
degree, gave me a new identity. When I showed a copy to my mother, to my
father, to my sister and brothers, they passed it around in silence, but without
looking through it. They stared at the cover with uncertain smiles, they were
like police agents confronted with a fake document. My father said, “It’s my
surname,” but he spoke without satisfaction, as if suddenly, instead of being
proud of me, he had discovered that I had stolen money from his pocket.
Days passed, the first reviews came out. I scanned them anxiously, wounded
by even the slightest hint of criticism. I read the best ones aloud to the whole
family, my father brightened. Elisa said teasingly, “You should have signed
Lenuccia, Elena’s disgusting.”
In those frenzied days, my mother bought a photograph album and began to
paste in it everything good that was written about me. One morning she asked,
“What’s the name of your fiancé?”
She knew, but she had something in mind and to communicate it she wished
to start there.
“Pietro Airota.”
“Then you’ll be called Airota.”
“Yes.”
“And if you write another book, on the cover will it say Airota?”
“No.”
“Why?”
“Because I like Elena Greco.”
“So do I,” she said.
But she never read it. My father didn’t read it, Peppe, Gianni, Elisa didn’t
read  it,  and  at  first  the  neighborhood  didn’t  read  it.  One  morning  a
photographer came and kept me for two hours, first in the gardens, then along
the stradone, then at the entrance to the tunnel, taking photographs. Later, one
of the pictures appeared in Il Mattino; I expected passersby would stop me on
the street, would read the book out of curiosity. Instead no one, not Alfonso,
Ada, Carmen, Gigliola, Michele Solara, who, unlike his brother Marcello, wasn’t
a complete stranger to the alphabet, ever said to me, as soon as they could:
your  book  is  wonderful,  or,  who  knows,  your  book  is  terrible.  They  only
greeted me warmly and went on.
I encountered readers for the first time in a bookstore in Milan. The event, I
soon  discovered,  had  been  urgently  planned  by  Adele  Airota,  who  was
following the book’s journey at a distance and traveled purposely from Genoa
for the occasion. She came to the hotel, kept me company all afternoon, tried
tactfully to calm me. I had a tremor in my hands that wouldn’t go away, I
struggled with words, I had a bitter taste in my mouth. I was angry with Pietro,
who had stayed in Pisa, he was busy. Mariarosa, who lived in Milan, made a
quick congratulatory visit before the reading, then she had to go.
I went to the bookstore terrified. The room was full, I went in with my eyes
down.  I  thought  I  would  faint  with  emotion.  Adele  greeted  many  of  those
present, they were friends and acquaintances of hers. She sat in the first row,
gave me encouraging looks, turned occasionally to talk to a woman of her age
who was sitting behind her. Until that moment I had spoken in public only
twice, forced to by Franco, and the audience then was made up of six or seven
of his friends who smiled with understanding. The situation was different now.
I had before me some forty refined, cultivated strangers who stared at me in
silence, with an unfriendly gaze; it was in large part the prestige of the Airotas
that compelled them to be there. I wanted to get up and run away.
But the rite began. An old critic, a university professor much esteemed in his
time,  said  as  many  good  things  about  the  book  as  possible.  I  couldn’t
understand his speech, I thought only of what I was to say. I fidgeted in my
chair, I had a stomachache. The world had vanished into chaos, and I couldn’t
find within myself the authority to call it back and put it in order again. Yet I
pretended self-assurance. When it was my turn, I spoke without really knowing
what I was saying, I talked in order not to be silent, I gesticulated too much, I
displayed  too  much  literary  knowledge,  I  made  a  show  of  my  classical
education. Then silence fell.
What were those people in front of me thinking? How was the critic and
professor beside me evaluating my remarks? And was Adele, behind her air of
cordiality,  repenting  her  support  of  me?  When  I  looked  at  her  I  realized
immediately  that  my  eyes  were  begging  her  for  the  comfort  of  a  nod  of
approval and I was ashamed. Meanwhile the professor touched an arm as if to
calm me, asked the audience for questions. Many stared in embarrassment at
their  knees,  the  floor.  The  first  to  speak  was  an  older  man  with  thick
eyeglasses, well known to those present but not to me. At simply hearing his
voice, Adele had an expression of annoyance. The man talked for a long time
about the decline of publishing, which now looked more for money than for
literary quality; then he moved on to the marketing collusion between critics
and  the  cultural  pages  of  the  dailies;  finally  he  focused  on  my  book,  first
ironically, then, when he cited the slightly risqué pages, in an openly hostile
tone. I turned red and rather than answer I mumbled some banal comments,
off  the  subject.  Until  I  broke  off,  exhausted,  and  stared  at  the  table.  The
professor-critic encouraged me with a smile, with his gaze, thinking that I
wanted to continue. When he realized that I didn’t intend to, he asked curtly:
“Anyone else?”
At the back a hand was raised.
“Please.”
A tall young man, with long, unruly hair and a thick black beard, spoke in a
contemptuously polemical way of the preceding speaker, and, a few times,
even of the introduction of the nice man who was sitting next to me. He said
we lived in a provincial country, where every occasion was an opportunity for
complaining,  but  meanwhile  no  one  rolled  up  his  sleeves  and  reorganized
things,  trying  to  make  them  function.  Then  he  went  on  to  praise  the
modernizing force of my novel. I recognized him most of all by his voice, it was
Nino Sarratore.
